Title: How Does Music Evoke Emotion? | Psychology Today
Link: https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/science-of-choice/202412/how-does-music-evoke-emotion

--- Full Text Start ---

How Does Music Evoke Emotion? | Psychology Today
Music allows you to release the emotions you're already feeling.
Music is remarkable in its ability to induce emotions in listeners.
There are certain features of music that resemble aspects of human expression.
The common belief that ‘music does you good’ is grounded in empirical studies.
Music is remarkable in its ability to evoke profound emotions — chills and thrills — in listeners. And being emotionally moved by music is an inherently pleasurable experience. Most music listeners use emotional expression as the most important factor in valuing music and the decision to buy a song (Juslin, 2019). How does music move us?
We hear certain kinds of music as sad because we have learned to associate them with sad events like funerals. The feeling is not the music, but what it reminds us of. When a particular piece of music becomes associated with specific moments in listeners’ lives, it tends to evoke emotions such as joy or sadness. Thus, if I first heard Chopin’s Waltz in E minor during a particularly sad period of my life and you first heard it in a particularly happy period of yours, it might, on later hearings, remind you of happy events, me of sad ones. Thus, by association, making you happy and me sad.
Source: cottonbro studio / Pexels
Music is the number one trigger for
. Listening to a song that was played a lot during a significant life event (e.g., music from your teens) many years ago can trigger a deeply nostalgic emotional experience. The feeling is not in the music, but in what it reminds us.
3. Music as an expression of emotion
Music embodies expressive qualities like melancholy and cheerfulness. Musical sounds can imitate or represent emotions, such as sorrow, joy,
, and hope. For example, the rapid, skipping tempo, or the loud level of sound make music cheerful. In contrast, a slow tempo or dark minor tonalities make music sad. Similar to music, cheerful people’s voices are energetic, and sad people tend to speak in soft subdued tones of voice.
Like reading fictional narratives, a great deal of our pleasure in the experience of fictional narratives is the pleasure we take in wondering what is going to happen. Listening to a song that has been listened to many times before holds no surprise, because one ‘knows the story.’
Music is merely a sequence of tones arranged over time. Each of these sound events in isolation may not be considered particularly rewarding; yet somehow their temporal dynamics can induce some of the most intensely pleasurable responses known to man, creating “highs” that have been famously described as like those of powerfully addictive drugs (Zarorre, 2015).
When people go to concerts or make music together, their emotions are in part influenced by the emotions of other people present in the context through rhythmic
and emotional contagion. Entrainment occurs when our bodily movements lock in to synchronize with music. Synchronizing with others and with musical rhythms is fun. Being in sync with another person produces positive attitudes toward them. This process of synchronization may help to explain group
, such as adolescent subcultures listening to specific forms of music (Kraus 2021).
In sum, music has the potential to evoke profound emotions in listeners. This potential is one of the primary motives for engaging in music listening. Listening to preferred music may be a more effective way of reducing feelings of
, New York, NY Oxford University Press.
Zatorre RJ. (2015). Musical pleasure and reward: mechanisms and dysfunction. Ann N Y
is an associate professor emeritus of health economics of addiction at the University of Illinois at Springfield.
More from Shahram Heshmat Ph.D.
More from Shahram Heshmat Ph.D.
Being overly polite might seem kind, but it often leads to problems anyway, in relationships, with friends, and at work.
Self Tests are all about you. Are you outgoing or introverted? Are you a narcissist? Does perfectionism hold you back? Find out the answers to these questions and more with Psychology Today.
Introversion / Extroversion Test
Seasonal Affective Disorder Test

--- End ---
