Title: Music as a Form of Therapy. It’s more than relating to the lyrics. | by Alyssa Nicole Maaño | ILLUMINATION | Medium
Link: https://medium.com/illumination/music-as-a-form-of-therapy-bcf40f6bd1b3

--- Full Text Start ---

Music as a Form of Therapy. It’s more than relating to the lyrics. | by Alyssa Nicole Maaño | ILLUMINATION | Medium
We curate & disseminate outstanding stories from diverse domains to create synergy. Inquiries:
Subscribe to our content marketing strategy:
https://drmehmetyildiz.substack.com/
It’s been a bad day, the longest Monday of your life.
The rain kept pouring as you try to catch your daily commute.
Of course, all the empty seats on the bus were taken.
There remained a small space to stand and lean onto that suspicious metal rail. Better than nothing.
Exhausted, you plugged in your earphones, not minding that your hair is dripping water on your cracked screen.
Chopin started playing as people continued filling the bus.
The melody of Nocturne Op.9 №1 seamlessly drowned out the distressing events of the day: coming in late for work, the complaint from a client, the unending deadlines, and spilling that first cup of coffee on the floor.
The images of these events faded while the rain continued teeming down the bus window, a tranquil scene to end the day.
Music has been engraved in every culture for the past centuries. From the Medieval to the Classical period, and until the 21st century, it is evident that music portrayed a huge role in the lives and evolution of humans in society.
Religious chants were sung in Gregorian churches. The choral music of the Renaissance developed into musical orchestras in the Baroque era. Soon enough, creative geniuses in classical music like Beethoven, Mozart, Chopin, and Bach were born.
one of the most influential bands of the 20th century, continues their legacy as rock icons. Different genres of music sprung in the 21st century, along with the ever-growing diversity of people and their taste in music.
Throughout these periods, it is also apparent how impactful music is on a collective and a personal level. As music becomes easier to access, the experience of listening to music becomes even more intimate and seen more than an activity for pleasure but as a tool for uplifting oneself and improving one’s state of mind.
How Music Helped Me Cope with Mental Stress
As someone who grew up listening and discovering different musicians and artists, I’ve often associated life scenarios and feelings with songs. One of my favorites is
Paradoxically, I don’t listen to it very often but whenever I do, I always feel like a great burden has been lifted and I’m able to flow again with life.
I get the same feeling when I’m meditating and doing yoga. At the end of every session, everyone would be lying down on their mats with their eyes closed (Savasana pose). The yoga instructor would then ring a metal bowl called the Tibetan singing bowl or the Himalayan bowl.
The vibration and rich tone produced from this type of bell is said to alleviate stress and anxiety, induce a peaceful state, and promote healing of the body. Along with deep breathing, it proved to be effective in improving my overall mental state.
More so, listening to classical music or lo-fi (low fidelity) beats while studying has greatly improved my ability to focus and absorb what I’m trying to learn.
But the most relaxing tune for me will always be the sound of nature. It’s always a tranquil experience to hear birds singing and fluttering through the leaves, the tree branches swaying to the motion of the wind, and even the sound of stray cats lurking through the bushes. It feels as if these beautiful sounds often go unnoticed and to be able to hear them amidst the noise of the city brings so much calmness.
Music has truly become an essential part of my life and has helped me cope through many difficult situations. It has contributed greatly to the way I perceive myself and how I take better care of my mental health.
Mental Health in Modern Society
In modern society, cases of depression, anxiety, and other mental health disorders continue to rise. According to the
World Health Organization’s (WHO) Global Health Estimate report last 2017
, over 300 million suffer from depression all over the globe which is estimated to be 4.4% of the total population.
Moreover, around 3.6% suffer anxiety disorders and suicide was listed as one of the top 20 leading causes of death in 2015, causing up to 1.5% of deaths worldwide. But as the statistics continue to increase, the battle to conquer mental health disorders remains to be problematic for most people. In less developed countries, seeking professional help is almost impossible.
In some cultures, mental health is still considered taboo and often disregarded as a vital aspect of general health and well-being. Even so, many mental health advocates continue to spread awareness about these problems. Current researches suggest numerous ways of addressing these issues.
Music as Therapy for Mental Health Disorders
blog article by the National Alliance on Mental Illnesses (NAMI) in 2016
, major interventions in a psychiatric hospital were made possible through music.
Through this method, the patient is given the opportunity to provide insight and possibly connect their previous experiences with song lyrics, therefore, introducing an auspicious approach for open discussion of emotions.
The patients were also encouraged to play instruments as a form of expressing difficult emotions such as anger. Noting the way the instruments are played, emotional assessment becomes easier.
Music therapy in the form of active listening to music has also been done on patients to regulate mood states. The rhythmic and repetitive aspect of music affects the neocortex of the brain, which is involved in processing language in humans. As a consequence, the patient remains calm and is refrained from behaving impulsively.
Songwriting also helped patients reflect their innermost thoughts and feelings through creating their own lyrics. This method proved to be rewarding and invoked a sense of validation and self-worth.
Music as a form of therapy can be seen as one of the tools for processing people’s emotions, trauma, and grief. The incorporation of music to clinical approaches in coping and treating mental health disorders is another step closer to understanding the complexity of the human psyche.
As daily life continues to challenge us and put our mental health on the line, it is a relief to learn that something so simple and common to us such as music can play so much significance in how we can overcome the difficulties we face.
Perhaps today, all it takes is one of Chopin’s nocturnes to ease our minds.
We curate & disseminate outstanding stories from diverse domains to create synergy. Inquiries:
Subscribe to our content marketing strategy:
https://drmehmetyildiz.substack.com/
Daydreamer with creative pursuits. Sharing insights on psychology, philosophy, music, art and life.

--- End ---
