Title: Music therapy and how it worked for me | by isabelle pellegrin | Medium
Link: https://medium.com/@isabellepellegrin60/music-therapy-and-how-it-worked-for-me-6624fc312843

--- Full Text Start ---

Music therapy and how it worked for me | by isabelle pellegrin | Medium
Music therapy and how it worked for me
After I graduated high school in Louisiana, Where I had lived my whole life, I moved to Florida by myself for college. I was suffering from not knowing how to thrive alone and music was the only thing that really gave me comfort. I didn’t know that what I was doing was called music therapy at the time, I’ve only just recently come across the term, but now I understand the power of music and how it has changed my perspective on the outside world and connected my to my inside world. Music activates multiple complex parts in your brain, more so than any other activity does. It activates the auditory cortex, your emotions are activated and synchronized, memories are brought back, even the motor system gets in on the action. You’re tapping to the beat of a song before you even realize you are! This is music therapy and how it works.
When you sign up for music therapy, the therapist will assess you to understand your needs and your strengths. They will discuss emotional well-being, physical health, psychological responses, motor skills, social functioning, communication abilities, cognitive skills, musical background and skills, trauma history, and trauma triggers. You will also discuss your preferences and goals you want to achieve. There is more than one way of doing musical therapy. You could be creating music, singing, listening, moving, discussing lyrics, or playing an instrument. It is all based on what you’re comfortable with and the goals you have set.
To release all emotions and practice becoming more emotive
Reduce stress, depression, and tension
To change your heart and respiration rate and lower your blood pressure
I didn’t go through a professional music therapist when I discovered how music makes me feel. In a way, I was able to self therapy through listening, singing, and playing the guitar. If I really want to deep dive, I’ll read lyrics while I listen to a song so I can see what the artist is saying. I’ve always loved music, but I never really knew how much it would come to mean to me as I grew up. I didn’t actually set goals when I started, but now I can see what my goals were compared to what they are now now that I have been practicing. When I started I was very isolated, self critical, unable to be alone with my own thoughts, and had very low sense of self-worth. I was also an emergency medical technician on an ambulance during the beginning of my music discovery and it got me through the many traumatic events endured during that job. Today I can proudly say and believe that Music has connected me spiritually to myself, I am content in the present, I have less anxiety about the future, and my overall physical and mental health has improved.
How our emotions are activated and synced through music
When you listen to music, the immediate response that you give off is your basic emotions. These come from the mimicking of the acoustic cues present in the music. The secondary response is an aesthetic response called enjoyment. Enjoyment is a much deeper response to music and is formed around familiarity with the music, your current mood, and your personality. Enjoyment leads to the conscious judgment of whether you like the music and what makes you like the music or not. Sometimes you connect to a music so intensely that you can have psychological responses like chills or goosebumps. So many regions in your brain are active at the same time. You start from having evaluative judgments of the music which happens in the anterior cingulate cortex, to conscious like or dislike happening in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, and then you start to recognize emotional connotations like happiness or sadness in the auditory regions. Music can trigger a response from the brain like releasing certain hormones to make you feel or do something. Pleasurable music leads to the release of dopamine. Dopamine is a neurotransmitter that allows you to feel pleasure, satisfaction, and motivation. When we feel a surge of dopamine it’s because we have achieved something or done something to make us feel good. A close opposite of dopamine could be the neurotransmitter called dynorphin. Dynorphin induces dysphoria which is the opposite of the euphoria you feel from dopamine. Dynorphin could be a direct result of stress increase, when activated for long periods it can feel awful.
In my experience, before I started using music as an outlet of self therapy, I was disconnected, disassociating, overthinking and just numb to every emotion that would pass through me. Now I feel as if my inner and outer beings are connected. Having this synchronicity has brought me peace, decreased my stress, reduce acne flare-ups, and so much more. Physically and mentally I am in much better shape and I feel like a real person again. This is only my experience, but there are undeniably direct links between music and emotions.
These are a few of my favorite artists, that took the lead and dragged me out of an unconscious state into this beautiful new consciousness that I am discovering more of every day.
Jeff Buckley: My all time favorite artist. There’s so many emotions in his work that we rarely get to explore such as passion, romance, suffering, and longing. I fully dove into Buckley's world through interviews and biographies about his life, and I discovered so much of myself through him. His work gave me the opportunity to explore the pain and love within myself and allowed me to acknowledge and accept hard emotions instead of disassociating from them.
Alice In Chains: Their sound is so amazing and deeper/darker than the most artist. If you’re into more grungy, depressive sounds with a hint of anger then this is the band for you. They are also a good sound to listen to when you’re experiencing those kinds of emotions to help you connect with them.
Tracy Chapman: Chapman is a folk based performer and her sound to me is almost melancholy and forgiving. Forgiveness is a huge aspect of any type of therapy. Forgiveness seems to be the ultimate goal.
Jack Johnson: Johnson gives off a fun, optimistic, youthful vibes in his most popular music, but he doesn’t lack the versatility to connect you to more somber feelings.
The black Crowes: The Crowes are a hard rock/blues band. I enjoy their sound and most of their songs.
Norah jones: Jones has the voice of an actual angel. She has a bluesy sound that will make you feel euphoric and open. All of her released music is amazing, but if you dig deeper and listen to her covers on YouTube, for example Black hole Sun, she can make you feel things that you are going to have to take a week to process. (I’m over exaggerating, but she is that amazing.)
Pink Floyd: They are the number one band in my opinion to “healthily” disassociate to. Sometimes a little disassociation is good for the soul. If are looking for a break from reality, they can get you there.
Harry Styles: Styles is probably one of my top artists that I go too when I need to take a step back and process at my emotions. His first, self titled album is my comfort album. It is so easy to get lost in and relate too. Fine line, his second album is where I go when I’m feeling emotions on a deeper/more uncomfortable level. The sounds in that album allow me to sit with those feelings and become more familiar with them. As it was, his latest album is where I go for joy, it’s all about singing and dancing with a few tear-jerkers hidden in between.
The smiths: Simply put, this a band for rolling around in your own self pity, which is totally acceptable to do every once in a while!
Bread: Lovely, simple, laid back, romantic sound for when you’re feeling what feels like no emotion. Bread is for when you are not experiencing anything internally, just the plain peacefulness of nothing.
Overall, if you can use music to connect to your emotions, your emotions will no longer control you and how you react in situations. There’s so much to learn about yourself through music, and you don’t even need a real therapist to guide you through it. Allow yourself to feel and evaluate the emotions presented to you through sound, and let the music heal you.
hii, I write about health, wellness, and basically anything that comes up in my daily life!

--- End ---
