Title: Music Therapy Can Be a Life-Changer | Psychology Today
Link: https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/how-music-heals/202109/music-therapy-can-be-life-changer

--- Full Text Start ---

Music Therapy Can Be a Life-Changer | Psychology Today
Music Therapy Can Be a Life-Changer
The important link between music, health, and happiness.
Music therapy taps into the power of music to help people improve their lives.
Music therapists are uniquely qualified and can use music to assist others with stress management, exploring life priorities, and more.
People are increasingly turning to music therapy for support in their daily lives.
Many have an intuitive sense of the power of music. It’s not unusual to see music used during fitness workouts, yoga classes, and running sessions. But not so many are aware that music
can tap into that power of music and amplify it tenfold, using it to dramatically improve life for those from many different walks of life.
Music therapy is practiced by individuals who are educated and trained in music, music-making, and therapy. They are musicians and therapists. They have a skillset that leaves them uniquely qualified to assist others in transforming their lives through music. We all can use music in our lives to relax or to change our mood. But with the support of a music therapist, this can be taken to a more profound level. A music therapist can do this not only through music listening, but through a broad scope of music-making experiences—from singing and drumming to improvisation, songwriting, and recording.
Music therapists work to improve quality of life by achieving therapeutic
that are meaningful to each individual. That can look different for different folks—for those with Alzheimer’s, for special needs children, for hospitalized children and adults, to name just a few.
Music therapy is certainly not restricted to special facilities. People are increasingly turning to music therapy for support in their daily lives. And in times of pandemic, lives can certainly be challenging. If you are finding these times wearing you down (and who wouldn’t?), a music therapist could help you with
, exploring life priorities, and any other particular goal meaningful to you. A music therapist is there to show you how to successfully use music in pursuit of your own health and
. No music skills are needed on your part. Just an interest in learning more about how you can tap into the powers of music in your own life. Music therapists have the skills and training to take it from there.
A closer look at music therapy in action can be seen in the
Securing the services of a credentialled music therapist would ensure the highest quality of music therapy experiences. In the United States, that would be a board-certified music therapist (MT-BC); in Canada, that would be an accredited music therapist (MTA) and/or MT-BC.
It’s important to keep in mind that choosing a music therapist (like choosing any therapist) involves finding the right personal match. Doing some preliminary exploratory work can be a good investment of time. A good place to start your research could include the following sites:
Certification Board for Music Therapists
American Music Therapy Association
Canadian Association of Music Therapists
To find a therapist, please visit the
Psychology Today Therapy Directory
Sandi Curtis, Ph.D., MTA, MT-BC,
is a music therapist and professor emerita at Concordia University in Montreal Canada. She is the author of the book,
Music for Women Survivors of Violence.
More from Sandi Curtis Ph.D., MTA, MT-BC
More from Sandi Curtis Ph.D., MTA, MT-BC
Being overly polite might seem kind, but it often leads to problems anyway, in relationships, with friends, and at work.
Self Tests are all about you. Are you outgoing or introverted? Are you a narcissist? Does perfectionism hold you back? Find out the answers to these questions and more with Psychology Today.
Introversion / Extroversion Test
Seasonal Affective Disorder Test

--- End ---
