1. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2024 May;296:52-58. doi: 
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2024.02.038. Epub 2024 Feb 21.

The effect of virtual reality and music on anxiety, non-stress test parameters, 
and satisfaction of high-risk pregnant women undergoing non-stress tests: 
Randomized controlled trial.

Yılmaz Sezer N(1), Aker MN(2), Yücel A(3), Çalışıcı D(1).

Author information:
(1)Ankara University Nursing Faculty, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Ankara University Nursing Faculty, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: 
menekseaker@gmail.com.
(3)University of Health Sciences, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Prenatal tests cause high-risk pregnant women to experience high 
anxiety levels.
AIM: This paper investigated the effect of Virtual Reality (VR) and music on 
anxiety, non-stress test parameters, and satisfaction of high-risk pregnant 
women undergoing non-stress tests (NSTs).
METHODS: This was a randomized controlled trial. The sample consisted of 102 
participants randomized into three groups (VR = 34, music = 34, and 
control = 34). Maternal anxiety was assessed using the Spielberger State-Trait 
Anxiety Inventory-S (STAI-S) before and after NSTs. Satisfaction was evaluated 
using the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) after NSTs. NST parameters were evaluated 
after NSTs. The findings were reported based on the Consolidated Standards of 
Reporting Trials (CONSORT).
RESULTS: The VR and music groups had significantly lower mean posttest STAI-S 
scores than the control group (p <.05). There was no significant difference in 
NST findings (reactive/nonreactive) between the groups (p >.05). The VR group 
had a significantly shorter reactive NST duration than the control group 
(p <.05). The VR and music groups had significantly higher mean VAS-satisfaction 
scores than the control group (p <.05) CONCLUSION: Virtual reality and music 
during NSTs help high-risk pregnant women experience less anxiety and satisfy 
them more with the procedure. We recommend that obstetric midwives and nurses 
use these low-cost, simple, and noninvasive methods to reduce anxiety in 
high-risk pregnant women during prenatal testing.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejogrb.2024.02.038
PMID: 38394716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.