1. Sensors (Basel). 2023 Jan 10;23(2):805. doi: 10.3390/s23020805.

A Dual-Path Cross-Modal Network for Video-Music Retrieval.

Gu X(1), Shen Y(1), Lv C(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Information and Communications Engineering, Communication 
University of China, Beijing 100024, China.

In recent years, with the development of the internet, video has become more and 
more widely used in life. Adding harmonious music to a video is gradually 
becoming an artistic task. However, artificially adding music takes a lot of 
time and effort, so we propose a method to recommend background music for 
videos. The emotional message of music is rarely taken into account in current 
work, but it is crucial for video music retrieval. To achieve this, we design 
two paths to process content information and emotional information between 
modals. Based on the characteristics of video and music, we design various 
feature extraction schemes and common representation spaces. In the content 
path, the pre-trained network is used as the feature extraction network. As 
these features contain some redundant information, we use an encoder-decoder 
structure for dimensionality reduction. Where encoder weights are shared to 
obtain content sharing features for video and music. In the emotion path, an 
emotion key frames scheme was used for video and a channel attention mechanism 
was used for music in order to obtain the emotion information effectively. We 
also added emotion distinguish loss to guarantee that the network acquires the 
emotion information effectively. More importantly, we propose a way to combine 
content information with emotional information. That is, content features are 
first stitched together with sentiment features and then passed through a fused 
shared space structured as an MLP to obtain more effective fused shared 
features. In addition, a polarity penalty factor has been added to the classical 
metric loss function to make it more suitable for this task. Experiments show 
that this dual path video music retrieval network can effectively merge 
information. Compared with existing methods, the retrieval task evaluation index 
increases Recall@1 by 3.94.

DOI: 10.3390/s23020805
PMCID: PMC9861296
PMID: 36679605

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.