1. J Am Board Fam Med. 2024 Nov-Dec;37(6):1150-1155. doi: 
10.3122/jabfm.2024.240079R1.

Practical Recommendations for Minimizing Pain and Anxiety with IUD Insertion.

Ovsepyan V(1), Kelsey P(2), Evensen AE(2).

Author information:
(1)From the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health - 
Department of Family Medicine and Community Health Madison, Wisconsin (VO, AEE); 
One Medical Austin, Texas (PK). vovsepyan@wisc.edu.
(2)From the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health - 
Department of Family Medicine and Community Health Madison, Wisconsin (VO, AEE); 
One Medical Austin, Texas (PK).

BACKGROUND: Intrauterine devices (IUDs) are one of the most effective, 
long-lasting, and convenient contraceptive methods available in the United 
States. Unfortunately, the anticipated pain and anxiety associated with an IUD 
insertion procedure deter many people from using this contraceptive method.
METHODS: A literature review was conducted on PubMed by searching the terms "IUD 
insertion", "pain management", "anxiety", "gynecologic procedures". The Cochrane 
database was also searched for reviews about pain management methods during IUD 
insertions. Findings were summarized using the American Academy of Family 
Physicians' Strength of Recommendation Taxonomy (SORT) scale.
RESULTS: Pharmacologic methods that can be used to reduce pain with IUD 
insertion include naproxen, tramadol, lidocaine paracervical blocks, 10% 
lidocaine spray, lidocaine-prilocaine cream, and EMLA cream. Non-pharmacologic 
methods for reducing pain or anxiety during gynecologic procedures include 
pre-insertion counseling, "verbal analgesia", lavender aromatherapy, distraction 
with music or television, using Valsalva maneuver instead of tenaculum during 
IUD insertion, and use of heating pad during procedure.
CONCLUSION: Moderately effective pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic methods 
exist for reducing pain and anxiety with IUD insertion. These treatment methods 
should be offered to create a more comfortable experience for patients. 
Additional research is needed to determine the comparative efficacy of these 
methods.

© Copyright by the American Board of Family Medicine.

DOI: 10.3122/jabfm.2024.240079R1
PMID: 40118554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None.