1. Front Pain Res (Lausanne). 2022 Jul 6;3:926584. doi:
10.3389/fpain.2022.926584.  eCollection 2022.

Development of a Mixed Hypnosis and Music Intervention Program for the 
Management of Pain, Anxiety, and Wellbeing in End-of-Life Palliative Care.

Bissonnette J(1)(2), Pierre S(3), Duong ATJ(4), Pinard AM(5)(6), Rainville 
P(7)(8), Ogez D(1)(3)(9).

Author information:
(1)Département d'anesthésiologie et de Médecine de la douleur, Université de 
Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(2)Faculté de Musique, Université Laval, Laval, QC, Canada.
(3)Département de psychologie, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, QC, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(5)Département d'anesthésiologie et de soins intensifs, Université Laval, Laval, 
QC, Canada.
(6)Centre intégré de recherche en réadaptation et intégration sociale (CIRRIS), 
CIUSSS de la Capitale-Nationale, Quebéc, QC, Canada.
(7)Département de stomatologie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(8)Centre de Recherche, Institut universitaire de gériatrie de Montréal 
(CRIUGM), Montréal, QC, Canada.
(9)Centre de Recherche, Hôpital Maisonneuve-Rosemont (CR-HMR), Montréal, QC, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: The palliative care people present needs that can be partially met 
by complementary intervention. Approaches based on the use of hypnosis and music 
are increasingly being studied and have shown potential benefits on pain, 
anxiety, and wellbeing for many populations including those in palliative care.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to present the initial process of creating and 
refining a hypnosis and music intervention program intended for persons in 
palliative care, with a panel of experts of diverse relevant backgrounds. It 
also aims to evaluate its feasibility, preliminary acceptability, and content.
METHODS: To achieve the objectives, we followed ORBIT recommendations for the 
development and redesign of behavioral interventions (phase I a-b). Based on a 
meta-analysis, reference interventions were identified and then adapted to the 
target population. Twenty-two experts from different backgrounds were consulted 
to obtain their evaluation on the acceptability, feasibility, and content of the 
interventions.
RESULT: The various components of the program were deemed appropriate or very 
appropriate by over 80% of the experts. However, possible risks were raised 
related to some uncertainty about the reactions of individuals to the 
intervention. Several experts (32%) indicated potential adverse effects 
consisting of negative emotional experiences during the sessions. Modifications 
were proposed specifically to reduce or mitigate this risk. Over 90% of the 
experts considered that the revised program provides a safer and more 
appropriate intervention for palliative care persons.
CONCLUSION: A mixed intervention program with hypnosis and music has been 
developed and attained a high level of consensus by the experts. The proposed 
intervention is ready to be assessed for clinical efficacy in a pilot study 
(ORBIT Phase II).

Copyright © 2022 Bissonnette, Pierre, Duong, Pinard, Rainville and Ogez.

DOI: 10.3389/fpain.2022.926584
PMCID: PMC9298501
PMID: 35875475

Conflict of interest statement: This article was completed as part of a Mitacs 
funded postdoctoral fellowship in partnership with Recherche-Interventions 
Cétosia, a company founded by JB. Conflict of interest controls are in place at 
the business incubator that supervises JB. The remaining authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The 
handling editor NK-M declared a shared affiliation with the author AD at the 
time of review.