1. ANZ J Surg. 2023 Jan;93(1-2):302-309. doi: 10.1111/ans.18209. Epub 2022 Dec
14.

Effect of meditation music and comedy movie interventions on postoperative 
kinesiophobia and pain in patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty.

Cici R(1), Bulbuloglu S(2), Kapikiran G(3).

Author information:
(1)Surgical Nursing Division, Nursing Department, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Corum Hitit University, Corum, Turkey.
(2)Surgical Nursing Division, Nursing Department, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Istanbul Aydın University, İstanbul, Turkey.
(3)Emergency Aid and Disaster Management Department, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Malatya Turgut Ozal University, Malatya, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to investigate the effects of music and comedy 
movie interventions on postoperative pain and kinesiophobia in patients who 
underwent total knee arthroplasty.
METHODS: This randomized-controlled study was carried out with the participation 
of patients who underwent total knee arthroplasty. The patients were divided 
into three groups. To reduce surgical pain and kinesiophobia, the patients in 
group 1 watched a comedy movie, those in group 2 listened to music, and those in 
group 3 did not participate in any intervention other than the routine practices 
of the clinic.
RESULTS: The personal and medical characteristics of the patients in all groups 
were similar. The patients in all three groups were kinesiophobic, and their 
surgical pain levels were moderate despite pharmaceutical interventions. Groups 
1 and 2 had a statistically significant decrease in kinesiophobia and pain 
scores after the interventions. The effects of having patients watch a comedy 
movie and having them listen to meditation music were not significantly 
different.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the study showed that listening to meditation music 
or watching comedy movie scenes had significant positive effects in alleviating 
postoperative pain and kinesiophobia after TKA. Based on the results of this 
study, it is recommended that patients watch comedy movies and listen to 
meditation music to alleviate their postoperative pain and kinesiophobia.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT, NCT05471778. The study was registered at 
ClinicalTrials.gov.

© 2022 Royal Australasian College of Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1111/ans.18209
PMID: 36515211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]