1. J Clin Oncol. 2023 Oct 1;41(28):4562-4591. doi: 10.1200/JCO.23.00857. Epub
2023  Aug 15.

Integrative Oncology Care of Symptoms of Anxiety and Depression in Adults With 
Cancer: Society for Integrative Oncology-ASCO Guideline.

Carlson LE(1), Ismaila N(2), Addington EL(3), Asher GN(4), Atreya C(5), 
Balneaves LG(6), Bradt J(7), Fuller-Shavel N(8), Goodman J(9), Hoffman CJ(10), 
Huston A(11), Mehta A(12), Paller CJ(13), Richardson K(14), Seely D(15)(16), 
Siwik CJ(17), Temel JS(18), Rowland JH(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, AB, Canada.
(2)American Society of Clinical Oncology, Alexandria, VA.
(3)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL.
(4)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, NC.
(5)University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(6)College of Nursing, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(7)Department of Creative Arts Therapies, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA.
(8)Synthesis Clinic, Winchester, United Kingdom.
(9)The George Washington University, Washington, DC.
(10)Paul's Cancer Support, London, United Kingdom.
(11)University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY.
(12)Memorial Healthcare System, Hollywood, FL.
(13)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, John Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD.
(14)Patient Representative, University of Illinois Cancer Center, Chicago, IL.
(15)University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(16)Canadian College of Naturopathic Medicine, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(17)Osher Center for Integrative Health, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(18)Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(19)Smith Center for Healing and the Arts, Washington, DC.

PURPOSE: To provide evidence-based recommendations to health care providers on 
integrative approaches to managing anxiety and depression symptoms in adults 
living with cancer.
METHODS: The Society for Integrative Oncology and ASCO convened an expert panel 
of integrative oncology, medical oncology, radiation oncology, surgical 
oncology, palliative oncology, social sciences, mind-body medicine, nursing, 
methodology, and patient advocacy representatives. The literature search 
included systematic reviews, meta-analyses, and randomized controlled trials 
published from 1990 through 2023. Outcomes of interest included anxiety or 
depression symptoms as measured by validated psychometric tools, and adverse 
events. Expert panel members used this evidence and informal consensus with the 
Guidelines into Decision Support methodology to develop evidence-based guideline 
recommendations.
RESULTS: The literature search identified 110 relevant studies (30 systematic 
reviews and 80 randomized controlled trials) to inform the evidence base for 
this guideline.
RECOMMENDATIONS: Recommendations were made for mindfulness-based interventions 
(MBIs), yoga, relaxation, music therapy, reflexology, and aromatherapy (using 
inhalation) for treating symptoms of anxiety during active treatment; and MBIs, 
yoga, acupuncture, tai chi and/or qigong, and reflexology for treating anxiety 
symptoms after cancer treatment. For depression symptoms, MBIs, yoga, music 
therapy, relaxation, and reflexology were recommended during treatment, and 
MBIs, yoga, and tai chi and/or qigong were recommended post-treatment.
DISCUSSION: Issues of patient-health care provider communication, health 
disparities, comorbid medical conditions, cost implications, guideline 
implementation, provider training and credentialing, and quality assurance of 
natural health products are discussed. While several approaches such as MBIs and 
yoga appear effective, limitations of the evidence base including assessment of 
risk of bias, nonstandardization of therapies, lack of diversity in study 
samples, and lack of active control conditions as well as future research 
directions are discussed.Additional information is available at 
www.asco.org/survivorship-guidelines.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.23.00857
PMID: 37582238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]