1. Front Robot AI. 2024 May 27;11:1363713. doi: 10.3389/frobt.2024.1363713. 
eCollection 2024.

Recommendations for designing conversational companion robots with older adults 
through foundation models.

Irfan B(1), Kuoppamäki S(2), Skantze G(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Speech, Music and Hearing, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Division of Health Informatics and Logistics, KTH Royal Institute of 
Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.

Companion robots are aimed to mitigate loneliness and social isolation among 
older adults by providing social and emotional support in their everyday lives. 
However, older adults' expectations of conversational companionship might 
substantially differ from what current technologies can achieve, as well as from 
other age groups like young adults. Thus, it is crucial to involve older adults 
in the development of conversational companion robots to ensure that these 
devices align with their unique expectations and experiences. The recent 
advancement in foundation models, such as large language models, has taken a 
significant stride toward fulfilling those expectations, in contrast to the 
prior literature that relied on humans controlling robots (i.e., Wizard of Oz) 
or limited rule-based architectures that are not feasible to apply in the daily 
lives of older adults. Consequently, we conducted a participatory design 
(co-design) study with 28 older adults, demonstrating a companion robot using a 
large language model (LLM), and design scenarios that represent situations from 
everyday life. The thematic analysis of the discussions around these scenarios 
shows that older adults expect a conversational companion robot to engage in 
conversation actively in isolation and passively in social settings, remember 
previous conversations and personalize, protect privacy and provide control over 
learned data, give information and daily reminders, foster social skills and 
connections, and express empathy and emotions. Based on these findings, this 
article provides actionable recommendations for designing conversational 
companion robots for older adults with foundation models, such as LLMs and 
vision-language models, which can also be applied to conversational robots in 
other domains.

Copyright © 2024 Irfan, Kuoppamäki and Skantze.

DOI: 10.3389/frobt.2024.1363713
PMCID: PMC11163135
PMID: 38860032

Conflict of interest statement: GS is co-affiliated with Furhat Robotics, as its 
Co-founder and Chief Scientist. The remaining authors declare that the research 
was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared 
that they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of 
submission. This had no impact on the peer review process and the final 
decision.