1. JMIR Form Res. 2023 Aug 23;7:e44267. doi: 10.2196/44267.

Developing Culturally Appropriate Content for a Child-Rearing App to Support 
Young Children's Socioemotional and Cognitive Development in Afghanistan: 
Co-Design Study.

LaMonica HM(1), Crouse JJ(1), Song YJC(1), Alam M(1), Wilson CE(1), Hindmarsh 
G(1), Yoon A(1), Boulton KA(2), Ekambareshwar M(1), Loblay V(1)(3), Troy J(4), 
Torwali M(4), Guastella AJ(2), Banati RB(5)(6), Hickie IB(1).

Author information:
(1)Youth Mental Health and Technology Team, Brain and Mind Centre, The 
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(2)Clinic for Autism and Neurodevelopment Research, Brain and Mind Centre, The 
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(3)The Australian Prevention Partnership Centre, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney, 
Australia.
(5)Medical Imaging Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Brain and Mind 
Centre, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(6)Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation, Sydney, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Optimal child-rearing practices can help mitigate the consequences 
of detrimental social determinants of health in early childhood. Given the 
ubiquity of personal digital technologies worldwide, the direct delivery of 
evidence-based information about early childhood development holds great 
promise. However, to make the content of these novel systems effective, it is 
crucial to incorporate place-based cultural beliefs, traditions, circumstances, 
and value systems of end users.
OBJECTIVE: This paper describes the iterative approach used to develop the 
Thrive by Five child-rearing app in collaboration with Afghan parents, 
caregivers (eg, grandparents, aunts, and nannies), and subject matter experts 
(SMEs). We outline how co-design methodologies informed the development and 
cultural contextualization of content to meet the specific needs of Afghan 
parents and the content was tested and refined in collaboration with key Afghan 
stakeholders.
METHODS: The preliminary content was developed based on a comprehensive 
literature review of the historical and sociocultural contexts in Afghanistan, 
including factors that influence child-rearing practices and early childhood 
development. After an initial review and refinement based on feedback from SMEs, 
this content was populated into a beta app for testing. Overall, 8 co-design 
workshops were conducted in July and August 2021 and February 2022 with 39 
Afghan parents and caregivers and 6 SMEs to collect their feedback on the app 
and its content. The workshops were audio recorded and transcribed; detailed 
field notes were taken by 2 scribes. A theoretical thematic analysis using 
semantic codes was conducted to inform the refinement of existing content and 
development of new content to fulfill the needs identified by participants.
RESULTS: The following 4 primary themes were identified: child-rearing in the 
Afghan sociocultural context, safety concerns, emotion and behavior management, 
and physical health and nutrition. Overall, participants agreed that the app had 
the potential to deliver valuable information to Afghan parents; however, owing 
to the volatility in the country, participants recommended including more 
activities that could be safely done indoors, as mothers and children are 
required to spend most of their time at home. Additionally, restrictions on 
public engagement in music required the removal of activities referencing 
singing that might be performed outside the home. Further, activities to help 
parents reduce their children's screen time, promote empathy, manage emotions, 
regulate behavior, and improve physical health and nutrition were requested.
CONCLUSIONS: Direct engagement with Afghan parents, caregivers, and SMEs through 
co-design workshops enabled the development and refinement of evidence-based, 
localized, and contextually relevant child-rearing activities promoting healthy 
social, emotional, and cognitive development during the first 5 years of 
children's lives. Importantly, the content was adapted for the ongoing conflict 
in Afghanistan with the aim of empowering Afghan parents and caregivers to 
support their children's developmental potential despite the security concerns 
and situational stressors.

©Haley M LaMonica, Jacob J Crouse, Yun J C Song, Mafruha Alam, Chloe E Wilson, 
Gabrielle Hindmarsh, Adam Yoon, Kelsie A Boulton, Mahalakshmi Ekambareshwar, 
Victoria Loblay, Jakelin Troy, Mujahid Torwali, Adam J Guastella, Richard B 
Banati, Ian B Hickie. Originally published in JMIR Formative Research 
(https://formative.jmir.org), 23.08.2023.

DOI: 10.2196/44267
PMCID: PMC10483291
PMID: 37610805

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: IBH is the co-director, 
health and policy at the Brain and Mind Centre, University of Sydney. The Brain 
and Mind Centre operates an early-intervention youth service at Camperdown under 
contract to headspace. He is the chief scientific adviser to and a 3.2% equity 
shareholder in InnoWell Pty Ltd. InnoWell was formed by the University of Sydney 
(32% equity) and PricewaterhouseCoopers (Australia; 32% equity) to deliver the 
A$30 million (US $21.6 million) Australian government–funded Project Synergy 
(2017-2020; a 3-year program for the transformation of mental health services) 
and to lead the transformation of mental health services internationally through 
the use of innovative technologies. HML is a section editor for JMIR Aging, a 
sister journal to JMIR Pediatrics and Parenting. She does not receive any 
financial benefit for this role or undue advantage in the peer-review process. 
VL is a board member of Matana Foundation, a philanthropic organization that 
provides funding to programs for disadvantaged young people in Australia. She 
does not receive any financial benefit for this role. All other authors declare 
no competing interests.