1. J Music Ther. 2024 Sep 12;61(3):263-287. doi: 10.1093/jmt/thae008.

Remini-Sing RCT: Therapeutic Choir Participation for Community-Dwelling People 
with Dementia and Their Primary Caregivers.

Tamplin J(1)(2), Thompson Z(1), Clark IN(1), Teggelove K(1), Baker FA(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Creative Arts & Music Therapy Research Unit, The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Royal Talbot Rehabilitation Centre, Austin Health, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Music Therapy Department, Norwegian Academy of Music, Olso, Norway.

Dementia negatively affects the wellbeing of both caregivers and care 
recipients. Community-based therapeutic choir singing offers opportunities for 
music participation and social engagement that are accessible and mutually 
enjoyable for people with dementia and their family caregivers and promotes 
shared and meaningful musical interactions, which may support relationship 
quality. This study aimed to investigate the impact of the Remini-Sing 
therapeutic choir intervention on relationship quality, quality of life, 
depression, and social connectedness for dyads, as well as caregiver burden and 
care recipient anxiety. A randomized-controlled trial design was used with a 
target sample of 180 dyads. Due to recruitment difficulties, 34 participant 
dyads were recruited and randomly assigned to a 20-week group singing condition 
(n = 16) or a waitlisted control group (n = 18). Participant dyads consisted of 
people with dementia and their family caregivers who resided at home in the 
community. The Remini-Sing therapeutic choirs were held in community settings. 
Assessments were conducted by masked assessors at baseline, 11 weeks, and 21 
weeks. Twenty-one dyads completed assessments at the primary timepoint (Week 
11). Issues with recruitment and retention resulted in an unpowered study with 
no statistically significant findings. Mean decreases in anxiety and depression 
for choir participants with dementia were supported by medium to large effect 
sizes, indicating a potential intervention effect to be explored in future 
powered studies. Key learnings related to study design are discussed regarding 
recruitment, retention, participant burden, and sustainability, with 
recommendations made for future dementia research.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Music Therapy Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jmt/thae008
PMID: 38600769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]