1. Sci Rep. 2024 Aug 16;14(1):18995. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-69578-y.

The effects of combining visual-auditory stimuli with exercise on short-term 
affect improvement: a randomized controlled trial.

Tao M(#)(1)(2), Huang H(#)(1), Gao J(2), Cao Y(1), Zhuang J(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Exercise and Health, Shanghai University of Sport, Shanghai, China.
(2)School of Sports and Health Sciences, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, 
China.
(3)School of Exercise and Health, Shanghai University of Sport, Shanghai, China. 
zhuangjie@sus.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Prior research has explored the effects of engaging with real or virtual natural 
landscapes and listening to music during aerobic exercise on short-term affect, 
however, the specific differences in the improvement of short-term affect by 
different combinations of Virtual Reality (VR) and music rhythm require further 
investigation. The objective of this study is to investigate the effects of 
various combinations of VR and music on short-term mood, thereby providing a 
reference for future research on public fitness. This study recruited 132 valid 
participants (mean age 24.0 ± 0.9 years), with a gender distribution of 68 males 
and 64 females. Participants were randomly assigned to one of four groups: 
Visual-Music (V-M), Music-Visual (M-V), Visual-only (V), and Music-only (M). The 
exercise mode was 15 min of aerobic power cycling with 2 min of low-intensity 
power cycling intervals in the middle. After the exercise, the participants were 
asked to sit and then performed either a VR intervention or a music intervention 
for 15 min. The collected indicators included blood pressure, positive/negative 
affect, and heart rate variability indicators (RMSSD, SDNN, LF/HF). Data 
analysis included descriptive statistics, repeated measures ANOVA, and 
multifactor ANOVA. The effect of different VR and Music combined with exercise 
interventions on the improvement of short-term affect was analyzed based on the 
effect size (ɳp2) and combined with the significance p-value. Intra-group 
results showed that DBP, positive and negative affect, SDNN, RMSSD indicators in 
V-M group were significant differences (p < 0.05), while SBP, positive affect, 
negative affect, SDNN, RMSSD, LF/HF indicators in M-V group were significant 
differences (p < 0.05). Only SDNN and RMSSD indicators in M group had 
significant differences (p < 0.05), and only SBP and RMSSD indicators in V group 
had significant differences (p < 0.05). The results between groups showed that 
only SDNN and LH/HF groups had a significant difference (p < 0.05), other 
indicators had a trend of improvement or positive promotion to a certain extent, 
but the statistical difference was not significant (p > 0.05). Aerobic exercise 
with consistent intensity and the combined visual-auditory interventions (M-V 
and V-M) significantly improved blood pressure, and the short-term affect of 
physiological responses (LF/HF, SDNN, RMSSD), along with subjective affect 
measures, compared to other groups. These findings suggest that incorporating VR 
and music with exercise can effectively enhance short-term affect, recommending 
an integrated approach to aerobic exercise and relaxation through music and 
visual exposure to natural environments.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-69578-y
PMCID: PMC11329759
PMID: 39152161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.