1. Children (Basel). 2022 Jun 15;9(6):890. doi: 10.3390/children9060890.

Qualitative and Arts-Based Evidence from Children Participating in a Pilot 
Randomised Controlled Study of School-Based Arts Therapies.

Moula Z(1), Powell J(2), Karkou V(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Public Health & Primary Care, Imperial 
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK.
(2)Research Centre for Arts & Well-Being, Edge Hill University, Ormskirk L39 
4QP, UK.

(1) Background: There is limited evidence on the impact of arts therapies as a 
tool for the prevention of mental health difficulties in childhood. This pilot 
randomised controlled study aimed to investigate the impact of arts therapies on 
children's mental health and well-being; the qualitative and arts-based evidence 
is presented in this article. (2) Methods: Sixty-two children (aged 7-10) with 
mild emotional and behavioral difficulties were recruited across four primary 
schools and were randomly assigned to either art therapy, music therapy, dance 
movement therapy, or dramatherapy. All children were interviewed individually 
after their participation in arts therapies. (3) Results: Children verbally and 
artistically expressed that they experienced positive changes in their mental 
health and well-being, such as improved self-expression, safety, empowerment, 
hope, and optimism for the future. The arts were particularly important for 
expressing complex emotions and feelings that cannot be easily verbalised. 
Recommendations are provided to improve the quality of group arts therapies in 
future interventions, such as through smaller groups, longer sessions, and 
strategies to protect the therapeutic environment. (4) Conclusions: This study 
embraced all arts therapies as one research domain and set children's verbal and 
non-verbal responses at the heart of outcome evaluation. This article highlights 
the importance of incorporating qualitative and arts-based methods to capture 
changes in children's mental health well-being in future experimental studies.

DOI: 10.3390/children9060890
PMCID: PMC9221561
PMID: 35740827

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.