1. Front Neuroinform. 2022 Oct 25;16:997282. doi: 10.3389/fninf.2022.997282. 
eCollection 2022.

A review: Music-emotion recognition and analysis based on EEG signals.

Cui X(1), Wu Y(2), Wu J(3), You Z(4), Xiahou J(5), Ouyang M(6).

Author information:
(1)The Art School, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(2)Department of Software Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(3)Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shenzhen, China.
(4)National Institute for Data Science in Health and Medicine, School of 
Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(5)The Mathematics and Computer School, Quanzhou Normal University, Quanzhou, 
China.
(6)The Affiliated Hospital of Medical School, Ningbo University, Ningbo, China.

Music plays an essential role in human life and can act as an expression to 
evoke human emotions. The diversity of music makes the listener's experience of 
music appear diverse. Different music can induce various emotions, and the same 
theme can also generate other feelings related to the listener's current 
psychological state. Music emotion recognition (MER) has recently attracted 
widespread attention in academics and industry. With the development of brain 
science, MER has been widely used in different fields, e.g., recommendation 
systems, automatic music composing, psychotherapy, and music visualization. 
Especially with the rapid development of artificial intelligence, deep 
learning-based music emotion recognition is gradually becoming mainstream. 
Besides, electroencephalography (EEG) enables external devices to sense 
neurophysiological signals in the brain without surgery. This non-invasive 
brain-computer signal has been used to explore emotions. This paper surveys EEG 
music emotional analysis, involving the analysis process focused on the music 
emotion analysis method, e.g., data processing, emotion model, and feature 
extraction. Then, challenging problems and development trends of EEG-based music 
emotion recognition is proposed. Finally, the whole paper is summarized.

Copyright © 2022 Cui, Wu, Wu, You, Xiahou and Ouyang.

DOI: 10.3389/fninf.2022.997282
PMCID: PMC9640432
PMID: 36387584

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.