1. J Clin Nurs. 2023 May;32(9-10):2114-2127. doi: 10.1111/jocn.16309. Epub 2022
Mar  29.

Integrative review of non-pharmacological intervention and multidimensional 
evaluation for intraoperative anxiety under spinal anaesthesia.

Lim K(1)(2), Jung S(2)(3), Kim H(1)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)College of Nursing, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Severance Hospital, Yonsei University Health System, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(3)Graduate School of Public Health, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(4)Brain Korea 21 FOUR Project, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Mo-Im Kim Nursing Research Institute, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(6)Yonsei Evidence Based Nursing Centre of Korea: a JBI Affiliated Group, Yonsei 
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Patients under spinal anaesthesia experience high levels of 
anxiety during surgery. Clinical nurses tried to manage patient's anxiety under 
spinal anaesthesia using non-pharmacological interventions for its benefit. 
Thus, it is required to identify comprehensive evidences of various 
non-pharmacological interventions and of how to measure anxiety under spinal 
anaesthesia.
AIMS: This study aims to review current research on the non-pharmacological 
interventions to relieve intraoperative anxiety under spinal anaesthesia and to 
identify subjective and objective measures of intraoperative anxiety under 
spinal anaesthesia.
METHODS: Wittemore and Knafl's integrative review methodology was used. 
Researchers conducted five scientific rigor steps; problem identification, 
searching literature, evaluation of literature, analysis of literature and 
presentation of results. The PRISMA checklist was used. To evaluate the level of 
evidence, critical appraisal tools of Joanna Briggs Institute were used.
RESULTS: Eleven studies were included in this integrative review. Delivering 
music is the most frequently used as non-pharmacological intervention by 
researchers. They tried to manage intraoperative anxiety under spinal 
anaesthesia with using diverse genre and application of music. In addition, dry 
cupping method, progressive muscle relaxation (PMR) exercise and virtual reality 
(VR) goggles were used in included studies. Researchers measured intraoperative 
anxiety under spinal anaesthesia with objective or subjective way. The 
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory and visual analogue scale were used as subjective 
method to approach intraoperative anxiety. In contrary, researchers tried to 
obtain objective evidence of intraoperative anxiety with vital signs, cortisol, 
blood glucose, alpha-amylase and adrenocorticotropic hormone.
CONCLUSION: Various types of non-pharmacological interventions are effective to 
manage patient's intraoperative anxiety under spinal anaesthesia. It is 
recommended to measure intraoperative anxiety under spinal anaesthesia with 
using both objective and subjective methods.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: Clinical nurses can use non-pharmacological 
interventions to manage intraoperative anxiety under spinal anaesthesia by 
comprehensive monitoring with diverse measures.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jocn.16309
PMID: 35352416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]