1. Clin Gerontol. 2025 Jan 9:1-14. doi: 10.1080/07317115.2024.2447839. Online
ahead  of print.

Harmonizing Cognitive and Psychosocial Needs in Cognitive Training: Lessons 
Learned from Piano Training in Persons Living with Mild Cognitive Impairment.

Lin R(1), Robinson LM(2), Su JJ(3), Freer E(4), Norton S(5), Kluger BM(6), 
Heffner KL(1)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Elaine Hubbard Center for Nursing Research on Aging, School of Nursing, 
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.
(2)Finger Lakes Geriatric Education Center, University of Rochester Medical 
Center, Rochester, NY, USA.
(3)School of Nursing, Tung Wah College, Hong Kong.
(4)Eastman School of Music, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA.
(5)School of Nursing, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, 
USA.
(6)Departments of Neurology and Medicine, University of Rochester Medical 
Center, Rochester, NY, USA.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVES: This qualitative study explored the potential of piano training as a 
holistic intervention to enhance both cognitive and emotional well-being. The 
study aims to detail the experiences of older adults living with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) in a piano training program and recommend strategies to boost 
engagement.
METHODS: Fourteen individuals (seven older adults with MCI and their family 
members) participated in individual semi-structured interviews before and after 
a 12-week group-based piano training program. These interviews were recorded, 
transcribed, open-coded, and analyzed by conventional content analysis.
RESULTS: Participants with MCI reported improvements in mood, cognitive 
function, and social interaction. The learning process elicited mixed emotions, 
with both enjoyment and frustration occurring during the learning phases. Skill 
mastery and positive social interactions were crucial for sustained engagement 
throughout the program, although group settings sometimes led to negative 
self-comparisons.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings highlighted the need to address both cognitive and 
emotional needs in interventions for MCI. Neglecting these aspects can 
exacerbate feelings of low self-esteem and other negative emotions.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Recommendations for cognitive training programs include 
positive reinforcement, personalized support, mental preparation for challenges, 
and rapport building to enhance participant motivation and adherence.

DOI: 10.1080/07317115.2024.2447839
PMID: 39783833