1. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. 2024 Jun;44(3):e431554. doi: 10.1200/EDBK_431554.

Integrative Therapies in Cancer Care: An Update on the Guidelines.

Gowin K(1), Muminovic M(2), Zick SM(3), Lee RT(4), Lacchetti C(5), Mehta A(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
(2)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Memorial Cancer Institute, Memorial 
Healthcare System, Miami, FL.
(3)Family Medicine and Nutritional Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
MI.
(4)Departments of Supportive Care Medicine and Medical Oncology, City of Hope 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Irvine, CA.
(5)Senior Clinical Practice Guidelines Methodologist, American Society of 
Clinical Oncology, Alexandria, VA.
(6)Memorial Division of Integrative Medicine, Memorial Healthcare System, 
Hollywood, FL.

INTRODUCTION: ASCO and the Society for Integrative Oncology have collaborated to 
develop guidelines for the application of integrative approaches in the 
management of anxiety, depression, fatigue and use of cannabinoids and cannabis 
in patients with cancer. These guidelines provide evidence-based recommendations 
to improve outcomes and quality of life by enhancing conventional cancer 
treatment with integrative modalities.
METHODS: All studies that informed the guideline recommendations were reviewed 
by an Expert Panel which was made up of a patient advocate, an ASCO 
methodologist, oncology providers, and integrative medicine experts. Panel 
members reviewed each trial for quality of evidence, determined a grade quality 
assessment label, and concluded strength of recommendations.
RESULTS: Strong recommendations for management of cancer fatigue during 
treatment were given to both in-person or web-based mindfulness-based stress 
reduction, mindfulness-based cognitive therapy, and tai chi or qigong. Strong 
recommendations for management of cancer fatigue after cancer treatment were 
given to mindfulness-based programs. Clinicians should recommend against using 
cannabis or cannabinoids as a cancer-directed treatment unless within the 
context of a clinical trial. The recommended modalities for managing anxiety 
included Mindfulness-Based Interventions (MBIs), yoga, hypnosis, relaxation 
therapies, music therapy, reflexology, acupuncture, tai chi, and lavender 
essential oils. The strongest recommendation in the guideline is that MBIs 
should be offered to people with cancer, both during active treatment and 
post-treatment, to address depression.
CONCLUSION: The evidence for integrative interventions in cancer care is 
growing, with research now supporting benefits of integrative interventions 
across the cancer care continuum.

DOI: 10.1200/EDBK_431554
PMID: 38820485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]