1. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2019 Feb;73(2):50-62. doi: 10.1111/pcn.12799. Epub 
2018 Dec 25.

Emotional expression in psychiatric conditions: New technology for clinicians.

Grabowski K(1), Rynkiewicz A(2)(3), Lassalle A(4), Baron-Cohen S(5), Schuller 
B(6), Cummins N(6), Baird A(7), Podgórska-Bednarz J(8)(9), Pieniążek 
A(8)(10)(11), Łucka I(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Adult Psychiatry Clinic, Faculty of Medicine, 
Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.
(2)Neurodevelopmental Disorders Research Lab, Institute of Experimental and 
Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Rzeszow, Rzeszow, Poland.
(3)Center for Diagnosis, Therapy and Education SPECTRUM ASC-MED, Gdansk & 
Rzeszow, Poland.
(4)Department of Psychology, Brain & Cognition, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Autism Research Centre, Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK.
(6)Department of Computing, GLAM - Group on Language, Audio, and Music, Imperial 
College London, London, UK.
(7)Embedded Intelligence for Health Care and Wellbeing, University of Augsburg, 
Augsburg, Germany.
(8)Institute of Physiotherapy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Rzeszow, 
Rzeszow, Poland.
(9)Association for Children with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in 
Rzeszow, Rzeszow, Poland.
(10)SOLIS RADIUS Association for People with Disabilities and Autism Spectrum 
Disorders in Rzeszow, Rzeszow, Poland.
(11)Medical Center for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders in Rzeszow, 
Rzeszow, Poland.
(12)Developmental Psychiatry, Psychotic and Geriatric Disorders Clinic, 
Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Medical University of Gdansk, 
Gdansk, Poland.

AIM: Emotional expressions are one of the most widely studied topics in 
neuroscience, from both clinical and non-clinical perspectives. Atypical 
emotional expressions are seen in various psychiatric conditions, including 
schizophrenia, depression, and autism spectrum conditions. Understanding the 
basics of emotional expressions and recognition can be crucial for diagnostic 
and therapeutic procedures. Emotions can be expressed in the face, gesture, 
posture, voice, and behavior and affect physiological parameters, such as the 
heart rate or body temperature. With modern technology, clinicians can use a 
variety of tools ranging from sophisticated laboratory equipment to smartphones 
and web cameras. The aim of this paper is to review the currently used tools 
using modern technology and discuss their usefulness as well as possible future 
directions in emotional expression research and treatment strategies.
METHODS: The authors conducted a literature review in the PubMed, EBSCO, and 
SCOPUS databases, using the following key words: 'emotions,' 'emotional 
expression,' 'affective computing,' and 'autism.' The most relevant and 
up-to-date publications were identified and discussed. Search results were 
supplemented by the authors' own research in the field of emotional expression.
RESULTS: We present a critical review of the currently available technical 
diagnostic and therapeutic methods. The most important studies are summarized in 
a table.
CONCLUSION: Most of the currently available methods have not been adequately 
validated in clinical settings. They may be a great help in everyday practice; 
however, they need further testing. Future directions in this field include more 
virtual-reality-based and interactive interventions, as well as development and 
improvement of humanoid robots.

© 2018 The Authors. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences © 2018 Japanese 
Society of Psychiatry and Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/pcn.12799
PMID: 30565801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]