1. Front Hum Neurosci. 2017 Dec 19;11:611. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00611. 
eCollection 2017.

Effect of Explicit Evaluation on Neural Connectivity Related to Listening to 
Unfamiliar Music.

Liu C(1), Brattico E(2)(3), Abu-Jamous B(1), Pereira CS(3), Jacobsen T(4), Nandi 
AK(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Brunel University London, 
Uxbridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Center for Music in the Brain, Aarhus 
University & Royal Academy of Music Aarhus/Aalborg, Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)AMI Centre, School of Science, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland.
(4)Experimental Psychology Unit, Helmut Schmidt University, University of 
Federal Armed Forces, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)The Key Laboratory of Embedded Systems and Service Computing, College of 
Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.

People can experience different emotions when listening to music. A growing 
number of studies have investigated the brain structures and neural 
connectivities associated with perceived emotions. However, very little is known 
about the effect of an explicit act of judgment on the neural processing of 
emotionally-valenced music. In this study, we adopted the novel consensus 
clustering paradigm, called binarisation of consensus partition matrices 
(Bi-CoPaM), to study whether and how the conscious aesthetic evaluation of the 
music would modulate brain connectivity networks related to emotion and reward 
processing. Participants listened to music under three conditions - one 
involving a non-evaluative judgment, one involving an explicit evaluative 
aesthetic judgment, and one involving no judgment at all (passive listening 
only). During non-evaluative attentive listening we obtained auditory-limbic 
connectivity whereas when participants were asked to decide explicitly whether 
they liked or disliked the music excerpt, only two clusters of 
intercommunicating brain regions were found: one including areas related to 
auditory processing and action observation, and the other comprising 
higher-order structures involved with visual processing. Results indicate that 
explicit evaluative judgment has an impact on the neural auditory-limbic 
connectivity during affective processing of music.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00611
PMCID: PMC5742221
PMID: 29311874