1. BMJ Open. 2025 Apr 9;15(4):e094040. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094040.

Virtual Reality and Sound Intervention under Chemotherapy (ViSu): study protocol 
for a three-arm randomised-controlled trial.

Holsteg S(#)(1)(2), Ernsten L(#)(2)(3), Schaal NK(3), Keßling LM(2), Schmutzler 
N(2), Fehm TN(4)(5), Friebe V(4)(5), Gattermann N(4)(6), Ruckhäberle E(4)(5), 
Karger A(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Integrated Oncology Düsseldorf (CIO-D), Düsseldorf, Germany 
Steffen.Holsteg@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.
(2)Clinical Institute for Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Medical 
Faculty & University Hospital Düsseldorf, Heinrich-Heine-Universitat Düsseldorf, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(3)Department of Experimental Psychology, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(4)Center for Integrated Oncology Düsseldorf (CIO-D), Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Düsseldorf, 
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(6)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Clinical Immunology, Medical Faculty 
and University Hospital Düsseldorf, Heinrich-Heine-Universitat Düsseldorf, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Patients undergoing chemotherapy often experience side effects 
during treatment, including psychological distress and symptoms of anxiety and 
depression. Interventions during chemotherapy that divert attention from 
potentially aversive environmental factors have been demonstrated to have a 
beneficial impact on these symptoms. Virtual reality (VR) offers the potential 
to visually and audibly disengage from the surrounding environment and can 
create an alternative sense of presence. This could facilitate the 
implementation of active guided interventions that may prove more effective than 
receptive interventions, such as listening to music. The present study examines 
the feasibility, acceptance and effectiveness of a VR intervention and a music 
intervention during chemotherapy.
METHODS: The single-centre three-arm, randomised-controlled trial investigates 
the efficacy of a VR mindfulness intervention and a music intervention in 
patients with cancer undergoing chemotherapy at the University Hospital 
Düsseldorf, Germany. Patients were randomly assigned to receive either (a) the 
VR mindfulness intervention, (b) the receptive music intervention or (c) the 
standard care (control group) in two consecutive chemotherapy sessions. A 
comprehensive psychological assessment and self-ratings using visual analogue 
scales will be conducted with situational anxiety as the primary outcome 
measure. Additionally, secondary measures will be employed to assess 
cancer-related anxiety, self-efficacy and chemotherapy-related side effects. 
Furthermore, salivary cortisol, heart rate and blood pressure will be recorded. 
At the end of the study, an evaluation questionnaire will be completed. It is 
planned to enrol 82 patients.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study has been approved by the ethics committee of 
the medical faculty of the Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf (2022-1880). 
Written informed consent is obtained from the patients prior to participation. 
The results will be published in international scientific, peer-reviewed 
journals. Conference presentations are also planned.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: German Clinical Trials Register (DRKS00029738).

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2025. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094040
PMCID: PMC11987127
PMID: 40204322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.