1. Complement Ther Med. 2025 May;89:103148. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2025.103148. Epub
 2025 Feb 26.

Effect of music intervention on dental anxiety and fear: A bibliometric analysis 
of RCTs from 2004 to 2024.

Gan Y(1), Huang J(2), Han S(1), Xu H(3), Zhu H(1), Li D(4), Wei Z(5), Sun F(6), 
Cai Z(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Academic Research, International Research Center for Medicinal 
Administration, Peking University, Beijing, PR China.
(2)Department of General Dentistry II, Peking University School and Hospital of 
Stomatology & National Center for Stomatology & National Clinical Research 
Center for Oral Diseases & National Engineering Research Center of Oral 
Biomaterials and Digital Medical Devices & Beijing Key Laboratory of Digital 
Stomatology & Research Center of Engineering and Technology for Computerized 
Dentistry Ministry of Health, Beijing, PR China.
(3)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Peking University School and Hospital of 
Stomatology & National Center for Stomatology & National Clinical Research 
Center for Oral Diseases & National Engineering Research Center of Oral 
Biomaterials and Digital Medical Devices & Beijing Key Laboratory of Digital 
Stomatology & Research Center of Engineering and Technology for Computerized 
Dentistry Ministry of Health, Beijing, PR China.
(4)Department of Tuina and Pain, Dongzhimen Hospital, Beijing University of 
Chinese Medicine, Beijing, PR China.
(5)Institute of Medical Innovation and Research & Medical Research Center, 
Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, PR China.
(6)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Peking 
University, Beijing, PR China. Electronic address: sunfeng@bjmu.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Peking University School and 
Hospital of Stomatology & National Center for Stomatology & National Clinical 
Research Center for Oral Diseases & National Engineering Research Center of Oral 
Biomaterials and Digital Medical Devices & Beijing Key Laboratory of Digital 
Stomatology & Research Center of Engineering and Technology for Computerized 
Dentistry Ministry of Health, Beijing, PR China. Electronic address: 
c2013xs@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Dental treatments, especially invasive procedures, often induce 
anxiety and fear, impacting future treatment adherence. Music intervention, a 
non-pharmacological approach, has shown promise in reducing anxiety and 
enhancing well-being, but further research is needed to explore its application 
in dental settings and the influence of factors like music type, duration, and 
volume.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the effects of music interventions on dental anxiety and 
fear, analyze research trends, and identify knowledge gaps through a 
bibliometric analysis of randomized controlled trials.
METHODS: Data from eligible studies were extracted through a comprehensive 
search. Descriptive bibliometrics, citation analysis, and keyword analysis were 
performed to assess research outputs, distribution, hotspots, and trends. 
Different human development indices (HDI) were used to analyze variations in 
publication year, sex distribution, and interventions across countries.
RESULTS: This study included 46 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) from 2004 to 
2024, with a mean annual growth rate of 5.95 %. India, Japan, and Turkey led the 
research output and citations. Approximately 4112 participants, with 45.68 % 
males were enrolled. Most RCTs focused on adults (65.22 %) and used passive 
music interventions (73.91 %). The most common treatment was dental extraction 
(39.13 %), with classical music being the predominant intervention (60.87 %). 
The control group were often blank (80.43 %). Various indicators of anxiety and 
fear have been reported. Significant differences were found in the sex 
distribution among the different HDI ranks (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: This study outlined the research profile of music interventions for 
reducing anxiety and fear during dental treatments, with India, Japan, and 
Turkey leading in terms of output. The most frequently studied intervention is 
classical music, which is typically used preoperatively. Notable sex 
distribution differences were observed across HDI groups. Future research trends 
should include more extensive trials, personalized interventions, standardized 
guidelines, and enhanced collaboration to optimize patient engagement and 
emotional regulation.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctim.2025.103148
PMID: 40021023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
article’