1. Int J Multimed Inf Retr. 2023;12(1):13. doi: 10.1007/s13735-023-00275-8. Epub 
2023 Jun 2.

Emotion-aware music tower blocks (EmoMTB ): an intelligent audiovisual interface 
for music discovery and recommendation.

Melchiorre AB(1)(2), Penz D(1)(3), Ganhör C(1), Lesota O(1)(2), Fragoso V(1), 
Fritzl F(4), Parada-Cabaleiro E(1)(2), Schubert F(5)(6), Schedl M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Computational Perception, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Linz, 
Austria.
(2)Human-centered Artificial Intelligence, Linz Institute of Technology, Linz, 
Austria.
(3)TU Wien, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Salzburg University of Applied Sciences, Salzburg, Austria.
(5)University of Applied Arts Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)St. Pölten UAS, St. Pölten, Austria.

Music listening has experienced a sharp increase during the last decade thanks 
to music streaming and recommendation services. While they offer text-based 
search functionality and provide recommendation lists of remarkable utility, 
their typical mode of interaction is unidimensional, i.e., they provide lists of 
consecutive tracks, which are commonly inspected in sequential order by the 
user. The user experience with such systems is heavily affected by cognition 
biases (e.g., position bias, human tendency to pay more attention to first 
positions of ordered lists) as well as algorithmic biases (e.g., popularity 
bias, the tendency of recommender systems to overrepresent popular items). This 
may cause dissatisfaction among the users by disabling them to find novel music 
to enjoy. In light of such systems and biases, we propose an intelligent 
audiovisual music exploration system named EmoMTB . It allows the user to browse 
the entirety of a given collection in a free nonlinear fashion. The navigation 
is assisted by a set of personalized emotion-aware recommendations, which serve 
as starting points for the exploration experience. EmoMTB  adopts the metaphor 
of a city, in which each track (visualized as a colored cube) represents one 
floor of a building. Highly similar tracks are located in the same building; 
moderately similar ones form neighborhoods that mostly correspond to genres. 
Tracks situated between distinct neighborhoods create a gradual transition 
between genres. Users can navigate this music city using their smartphones as 
control devices. They can explore districts of well-known music or decide to 
leave their comfort zone. In addition, EmoMTB   integrates an emotion-aware 
music recommendation system that re-ranks the list of suggested starting points 
for exploration according to the user's self-identified emotion or the 
collective emotion expressed in EmoMTB 's Twitter channel. Evaluation of 
EmoMTB   has been carried out in a threefold way: by quantifying the homogeneity 
of the clustering underlying the construction of the city, by measuring the 
accuracy of the emotion predictor, and by carrying out a web-based survey 
composed of open questions to obtain qualitative feedback from users.

© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1007/s13735-023-00275-8
PMCID: PMC10238318
PMID: 37274943

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors have no 
competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this article.