1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2025 Apr;1546(1):120-135. doi: 10.1111/nyas.15315. Epub 2025
 Mar 18.

Cortical and behavioral tracking of rhythm in music: Effects of pitch 
predictability, enjoyment, and expertise.

Keitel A(1), Pelofi C(2)(3), Guan X(3)(4), Watson E(1), Wight L(1)(5), Allen 
S(1), Mencke I(6)(7), Keitel C(#)(1), Rimmele J(#)(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Max Planck NYU Center for Language, Music, and Emotion, New York, New York, 
USA.
(4)Digital and Cognitive Musicology Lab, École Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(5)School of Psychology, Aston University, Birmingham, UK.
(6)Department of Medical Physics and Acoustics, University of Oldenburg, 
Oldenburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Music, Max-Planck-Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, 
Frankfurt, Germany.
(8)Department of Cognitive Neuropsychology, Max-Planck-Institute for Empirical 
Aesthetics, Frankfurt, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

The cortical tracking of stimulus features is a crucial neural requisite of how 
we process continuous music. We here tested whether cortical tracking of the 
beat, typically related to rhythm processing, is modulated by pitch 
predictability and other top-down factors. Participants listened to tonal (high 
pitch predictability) and atonal (low pitch predictability) music while 
undergoing electroencephalography. We analyzed their cortical tracking of the 
acoustic envelope. Cortical envelope tracking was stronger while listening to 
atonal music, potentially reflecting listeners' violated pitch expectations and 
increased attention allocation. Envelope tracking was also stronger with more 
expertise and enjoyment. Furthermore, we showed cortical tracking of pitch 
surprisal (using IDyOM), which suggests that listeners' expectations match those 
computed by the IDyOM model, with higher surprisal for atonal music. 
Behaviorally, we measured participants' ability to finger-tap to the beat of 
tonal and atonal sequences in two experiments. Finger-tapping performance was 
better in the tonal condition, indicating a positive effect of pitch 
predictability on behavioral rhythm processing. Cortical envelope tracking 
predicted tapping performance for tonal music, as did pitch-surprisal tracking 
for atonal music, indicating that high and low predictability might impose 
different processing regimes. Taken together, our results show various ways that 
top-down factors impact musical rhythm processing.

© 2025 The Author(s). Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.15315
PMCID: PMC11998481
PMID: 40101105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests.