1. PLoS One. 2019 Mar 18;14(3):e0213516. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0213516. 
eCollection 2019.

A closed-loop, music-based brain-computer interface for emotion mediation.

Ehrlich SK(1), Agres KR(2)(3), Guan C(4), Cheng G(1).

Author information:
(1)Chair for Cognitive Systems, Department of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, Technische Universität München (TUM), Munich, Germany.
(2)Institute of High Performance Computing, Social and Cognitive Computing 
Department, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore, 
Singapore.
(3)Yong Siew Toh Conservatory of Music, National University of Singapore (NUS), 
Singapore, Singapore.
(4)School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University 
(NTU), Singapore, Singapore.

Emotions play a critical role in rational and intelligent behavior; a better 
fundamental knowledge of them is indispensable for understanding higher order 
brain function. We propose a non-invasive brain-computer interface (BCI) system 
to feedback a person's affective state such that a closed-loop interaction 
between the participant's brain responses and the musical stimuli is 
established. We realized this concept technically in a functional prototype of 
an algorithm that generates continuous and controllable patterns of synthesized 
affective music in real-time, which is embedded within a BCI architecture. We 
evaluated our concept in two separate studies. In the first study, we tested the 
efficacy of our music algorithm by measuring subjective affective responses from 
11 participants. In a second pilot study, the algorithm was embedded in a 
real-time BCI architecture to investigate affective closed-loop interactions in 
5 participants. Preliminary results suggested that participants were able to 
intentionally modulate the musical feedback by self-inducing emotions (e.g., by 
recalling memories), suggesting that the system was able not only to capture the 
listener's current affective state in real-time, but also potentially provide a 
tool for listeners to mediate their own emotions by interacting with music. The 
proposed concept offers a tool to study emotions in the loop, promising to cast 
a complementary light on emotion-related brain research, particularly in terms 
of clarifying the interactive, spatio-temporal dynamics underlying affective 
processing in the brain.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0213516
PMCID: PMC6422328
PMID: 30883569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.