1. PLoS One. 2018 Jan 2;13(1):e0189367. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189367. 
eCollection 2018.

Evidence of emotion-antecedent appraisal checks in electroencephalography and 
facial electromyography.

Coutinho E(1)(2), Gentsch K(3), van Peer J(4), Scherer KR(3), Schuller BW(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Music, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Swiss Center for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(4)Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 
Netherlands.
(5)Chair of Complex & Intelligent Systems, University of Passau, Passau, 
Germany.

In the present study, we applied Machine Learning (ML) methods to identify 
psychobiological markers of cognitive processes involved in the process of 
emotion elicitation as postulated by the Component Process Model (CPM). In 
particular, we focused on the automatic detection of five appraisal 
checks-novelty, intrinsic pleasantness, goal conduciveness, control, and 
power-in electroencephalography (EEG) and facial electromyography (EMG) signals. 
We also evaluated the effects on classification accuracy of averaging the raw 
physiological signals over different numbers of trials, and whether the use of 
minimal sets of EEG channels localized over specific scalp regions of interest 
are sufficient to discriminate between appraisal checks. We demonstrated the 
effectiveness of our approach on two data sets obtained from previous studies. 
Our results show that novelty and power appraisal checks can be consistently 
detected in EEG signals above chance level (binary tasks). For novelty, the best 
classification performance in terms of accuracy was achieved using features 
extracted from the whole scalp, and by averaging across 20 individual trials in 
the same experimental condition (UAR = 83.5 ± 4.2; N = 25). For power, the best 
performance was obtained by using the signals from four pre-selected EEG 
channels averaged across all trials available for each participant (UAR = 70.6 ± 
5.3; N = 24). Together, our results indicate that accurate classification can be 
achieved with a relatively small number of trials and channels, but that 
averaging across a larger number of individual trials is beneficial for the 
classification for both appraisal checks. We were not able to detect any 
evidence of the appraisal checks under study in the EMG data. The proposed 
methodology is a promising tool for the study of the psychophysiological 
mechanisms underlying emotional episodes, and their application to the 
development of computerized tools (e.g., Brain-Computer Interface) for the study 
of cognitive processes involved in emotions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189367
PMCID: PMC5749688
PMID: 29293572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.