1. Children (Basel). 2025 Mar 7;12(3):335. doi: 10.3390/children12030335.

Motor-Sensory Learning in Children with Disabilities: Does Piano Practice Help?

Strübbe S(1), Roy S(1), Sidorenko I(1), Lampe R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit of the Buhl-Strohmaier Foundation for Cerebral Palsy and 
Pediatric Neuroorthopaedics, Department of Orthopaedics and Sports Orthopaedics, 
School of Medicine and Health, TUM University Hospital Rechts der Isar, 
Technical University of Munich, Ismaninger Str. 22, 81675 Munich, Germany.
(2)Markus Würth Professorship, Technical University of Munich, Ismaninger 
Strasse 22, 81675 Munich, Germany.

Background/Objectives: Patients with physical disabilities, like cerebral palsy, 
the most common movement disorder in childhood, can benefit from instrumental 
therapy using piano. Playing the piano promotes the interaction between 
different brain regions and integrates motor skills, sensory skills, musical 
hearing, and emotions. A pilot music study examined the effects of six months of 
piano lessons on hand motor skills and musical hearing in groups of children 
with motor disabilities. Methods: The allocation to the group was not 
randomized. Various tests, including the standardized Box and Block Test (BBT) 
and piano tests, assessed hand motor skills. Musical hearing was evaluated, and 
a questionnaire was used to determine the participants' enjoyment and experience 
with the piano lessons. The regularity, tempo of keystrokes, and synchronization 
between the two hands were assessed and compared to evaluate the effects of six 
months of piano training. Results: After six months of piano training, 
statistically significant improvements were observed in the BBT, as well as in 
the regularity and tempo of the non-dominant hand. The children showed 
significant improvement in hand-motor control, moving 27.3% more cubes in the 
BBT. Regularity and tempo in piano playing, especially in the non-dominant hand, 
also improved. Moreover, 55% of the children better recognized the correct 
pitches of notes. Conclusions: Thus, this study supports the concept that piano 
lessons are an effective form of physical therapy for the development of hand 
motor skills and musical hearing.

DOI: 10.3390/children12030335
PMCID: PMC11941049
PMID: 40150617

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, 
or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision 
to publish the results.