1. BMC Complement Med Ther. 2025 Mar 6;25(1):91. doi: 10.1186/s12906-024-04739-0.

Evaluating the therapeutic use of music to address anxiety for women undergoing 
gynaecological and fertility treatments.

Short AE(1)(2), Andreadis N(3), Cheung G(4), Stulz V(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)SoHCA, MARCS & THRI, Western Sydney University, Penrith, NSW, Australia. 
a.short@westernsydney.edu.au.
(2)Faculty of Medicine & Health, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia. a.short@westernsydney.edu.au.
(3)Newtown Fertility Centre, Newtown, NSW, Australia.
(4)School of Humanities and Communication Arts, Western Sydney University, 
Penrith, NSW, Australia.
(5)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Western Sydney University, Penrith, NSW, 
Australia.
(6)Faculty of Health, University of Canberra, Bruce, ACT, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Music has been effectively used to address anxiety associated with 
medical treatments across broad applications. However, scant evidence exists 
about using music to reduce the significant anxiety experienced by women 
undergoing gynaecological procedures and fertility treatments. Such anxiety 
relates to the nature of procedures/examinations, invasiveness of the 
procedures, uncertainty around expectations, and intimate body part exposure, 
potentially affecting outcomes in triggering sympathetic nervous system 
responses. Music potentially contributes to anxiety management via known 
physiological and emotional effects. This funded collaborative project 
investigates therapeutic uses of music to address anxiety before and during 
gynaecology and fertility procedures, in order to assist participants with 
reducing their anxiety.
METHODS: Participants attending office, day surgery and other hospital 
procedures (N = 41) completed validated self-report surveys before and after 
procedures, listening to specific music via a purpose-designed Music Star. 
Additional contextual and qualitative data was sought to understand the nature 
of the experience for the women.
RESULTS: Results of this study indicated that the music intervention appeared to 
have a significant effect of reducing anxiety for women awaiting gynaecological 
and fertility procedures (p < .001, r = .82).
CONCLUSIONS: The use of music forms an acceptable intervention to decrease 
anxiety in this context and can enhance the experience of women during 
treatment. Such an increased use of music can provide anxiety management 
benefits to women undergoing gynaecological and fertility treatments, with these 
experiences suggesting potential educational benefits to support women through 
this extremely stressful and complex stage of their life.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12906-024-04739-0
PMCID: PMC11883957
PMID: 40050810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Together with my colleagues Dr Natasha Andreadis, Ms Geena Cheung, 
and Associate Professor Virginia Stulz, we confirm that Ethical Approval was 
granted for the Study as a scientific research study. This Ethical Approval was 
granted by the Human Research Ethics Committee of Western Sydney University, 
with the approval number of H13273 on 6 June, 2019. Consent for publication: 
Consent for publication was given as per the Human Research Ethics approval and 
consent process. Competing interests: The authors declare no competing 
interests.