1. Front Psychol. 2018 Nov 13;9:2118. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02118. eCollection 
2018.

Effects of Musical Tempo on Musicians' and Non-musicians' Emotional Experience 
When Listening to Music.

Liu Y(1)(2)(3), Liu G(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Wei D(1)(2)(3), Li Q(2)(3)(4), Yuan 
G(2)(3)(4), Wu S(2)(3)(4), Wang G(6), Zhao X(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Psychology, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Institute of Affective Computing and Information Processing, Southwest 
University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Chongqing Brain Science Collaborative Innovation Center, Southwest 
University, Chongqing, China.
(4)School of Electronic and Information Engineering of Southwest University, 
Chongqing, China.
(5)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Non-linear Circuit and Intelligent Information 
Processing, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(6)School of Music, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.

Tempo is an important musical element that affects human's emotional processes 
when listening to music. However, it remains unclear how tempo and training 
affect individuals' emotional experience of music. To explore the neural 
underpinnings of the effects of tempo on music-evoked emotion, music with fast, 
medium, and slow tempi were collected to compare differences in emotional 
responses using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of neural activity 
between musicians and non-musicians. Behaviorally, musicians perceived higher 
valence in fast music than did non-musicians. The main effects of musicians and 
non-musicians and tempo were significant, and a near significant interaction 
between group and tempo was found. In the arousal dimension, the mean score of 
medium-tempo music was the highest among the three kinds; in the valence 
dimension, the mean scores decreased in order from fast music, medium music, to 
slow music. Functional analyses revealed that the neural activation of musicians 
was stronger than those of non-musicians in the left inferior parietal lobe 
(IPL). A comparison of tempi showed a stronger activation from fast music than 
slow music in the bilateral superior temporal gyrus (STG), which provided 
corresponding neural evidence for the highest valence reported by participants 
for fast music. Medium music showed stronger activation than slow music in the 
right Heschl's gyrus (HG), right middle temporal gyrus (MTG), right posterior 
cingulate cortex (PCC), right precuneus, right IPL, and left STG. Importantly, 
this study confirmed and explained the connection between music tempo and 
emotional experiences, and their interaction with individuals' musical training.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02118
PMCID: PMC6243583
PMID: 30483173