1. Complement Ther Clin Pract. 2025 May;59:101973. doi:
10.1016/j.ctcp.2025.101973.  Epub 2025 Mar 18.

Evaluating the impact of lavender aromatherapy and music therapy on reducing 
stress, anxiety, and depression in female nurses during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Yang HJ(1), Li MW(2), Chen TC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, College of Health Care and Management, Chung 
Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Family and Community 
Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Changhua Hospital Ministry of Health and Welfare Nursing Department, 
Changhua, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Public Health, College of Health Care and Management, Chung 
Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
jenny258989@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: Nurses often experience high levels of physical and psychological 
stress due to frequent exposure to emergency and critical situations, which can 
adversely affect their professional performance. This study aimed to evaluate 
and compare the short- and long-term impacts of combining aromatherapy with 
music therapy versus using aromatherapy alone on the physical and psychological 
well-being of nurses during the COVID-19 pandemic.
METHOD: This study employed a quasi-experimental design without non-intervention 
control group and recruited 60 nurses from a regional teaching hospital in 
central Taiwan between February and November 2023. Participants were randomly 
assigned to two groups: one group received aromatherapy, and the other group 
received a combination of aromatherapy and music therapy. The aromatherapy 
intervention involved inhaling gas infused with lavender essential oil. The 
intervention was conducted once a week during the lunch break for 20 min over a 
six-week period. Physiological and psychological indicators were compared before 
and after the intervention. Physiological indicators included systolic blood 
pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), and pulse rate (PR). 
Psychological indicators included scores on the Nursing Stress Scale (NSS), Beck 
Anxiety Inventory (BAI), and Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), which measured 
stress, anxiety, and depression, respectively.
RESULTS: Overall, after each aromatherapy intervention, the physiological and 
psychological measures of the nurses in both groups showed significant 
reductions (p < 0.05) based on paired t-tests. After six measurements, a one-way 
repeated measures ANOVA was conducted, revealing that most physiological and 
psychological measures of the nurses in the aromatherapy-only group were 
significantly reduced (p < 0.05), although no significant differences were found 
for diastolic blood pressure and pulse rate. In the group receiving aromatherapy 
combined with music therapy, all physiological and psychological measures showed 
significant reductions in repeated measures tests (p < 0.05). These results 
suggest that aromatherapy combined with music therapy not only improved physical 
and psychological symptoms immediately but also had lasting effects for at least 
six weeks.
CONCLUSIONS: This study found that aromatherapy effectively reduced the physical 
and psychological stress of nurses, with even greater benefits when combined 
with music therapy. This approach not only provided immediate effects but also 
were associated with lasting benefits for an extended duration.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctcp.2025.101973
PMID: 40127529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.