1. BMJ Open. 2025 Mar 21;15(3):e097233. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2024-097233.

Perceptions of music listening for pain management: a multi-method study.

van der Valk Bouman ES(#)(1), Becker AS(#)(2), Schaap J(3), Cats R(1), Berghman 
M(3), Klimek M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands a.becker@erasmusmc.nl.
(3)Department of Arts and Culture Studies, Erasmus University Rotterdam, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Anesthesiology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: Music listening for pain relief is well studied in diverse 
healthcare settings, but its implementation remains challenging. While 
healthcare providers generally have a positive attitude, there is a lack of 
knowledge about healthcare recipients' perceptions and attitudes. Therefore, the 
aim of this study is to explore healthcare recipients' perceptions of listening 
to music for pain management, focusing on their general attitudes, 
implementation strategies and subjective experiences of how music helps (or does 
not help).
DESIGN: A multi-method study comprising a quantitative survey and qualitative 
interviews. It is a follow-up conducted 6 months after a randomised experimental 
study, which assessed the influence of different music genres on pain tolerance. 
At the end of the original experiment, participants received advice on listening 
to music in painful situations.
SETTING: Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
PARTICIPANTS: The survey involved 169 participants (age mean 30.6, SD 9.8; 61.9% 
female) who participated in the initial trial. Following this, 20 in-depth 
interviews were conducted.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Perceptions of music for pain management were investigated, 
revealing general trends in the quantitative survey data. Data-led thematic 
analysis of the qualitative interviews focused on individual perceptions.
RESULTS: Participants showed a high willingness to use music for pain relief, 
particularly for so-called emotional pain (eg, anxiety, stress and heartbreak). 
Individual attitudes varied regarding different situations, types of music and 
types of pain. Barriers such as not considering the option and social 
sensitivity within healthcare contexts were discussed. A proactive approach by 
healthcare professionals and autonomy of healthcare recipients were suggested to 
overcome these barriers. Interestingly, the 'wrong' type of music or the 'wrong' 
situation were mentioned as non-beneficial or even harmful.
CONCLUSIONS: Awareness of individual needs and potential negative effects is 
crucial for the use of music for pain relief. A proactive and personalised 
approach is needed to effectively implement music in healthcare.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2025. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2024-097233
PMCID: PMC11931901
PMID: 40118490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.