1. Front Neurosci. 2021 Jul 14;15:689791. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.689791. 
eCollection 2021.

Dual-Threshold-Based Microstate Analysis on Characterizing Temporal Dynamics of 
Affective Process and Emotion Recognition From EEG Signals.

Chen J(1), Li H(1), Ma L(1), Bo H(2), Soong F(3), Shi Y(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science and Technology, Faculty of Computing, Harbin 
Institute of Technology, Harbin, China.
(2)Shenzhen Academy of Aerospace Technology, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Speech Group, Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China.
(4)Heilongjiang Provincial Hospital, Harbin, China.

Recently, emotion classification from electroencephalogram (EEG) data has 
attracted much attention. As EEG is an unsteady and rapidly changing voltage 
signal, the features extracted from EEG usually change dramatically, whereas 
emotion states change gradually. Most existing feature extraction approaches do 
not consider these differences between EEG and emotion. Microstate analysis 
could capture important spatio-temporal properties of EEG signals. At the same 
time, it could reduce the fast-changing EEG signals to a sequence of 
prototypical topographical maps. While microstate analysis has been widely used 
to study brain function, few studies have used this method to analyze how brain 
responds to emotional auditory stimuli. In this study, the authors proposed a 
novel feature extraction method based on EEG microstates for emotion 
recognition. Determining the optimal number of microstates automatically is a 
challenge for applying microstate analysis to emotion. This research proposed 
dual-threshold-based atomize and agglomerate hierarchical clustering (DTAAHC) to 
determine the optimal number of microstate classes automatically. By using the 
proposed method to model the temporal dynamics of auditory emotion process, we 
extracted microstate characteristics as novel temporospatial features to improve 
the performance of emotion recognition from EEG signals. We evaluated the 
proposed method on two datasets. For public music-evoked EEG Dataset for Emotion 
Analysis using Physiological signals, the microstate analysis identified 10 
microstates which together explained around 86% of the data in global field 
power peaks. The accuracy of emotion recognition achieved 75.8% in valence and 
77.1% in arousal using microstate sequence characteristics as features. Compared 
to previous studies, the proposed method outperformed the current feature sets. 
For the speech-evoked EEG dataset, the microstate analysis identified nine 
microstates which together explained around 85% of the data. The accuracy of 
emotion recognition achieved 74.2% in valence and 72.3% in arousal using 
microstate sequence characteristics as features. The experimental results 
indicated that microstate characteristics can effectively improve the 
performance of emotion recognition from EEG signals.

Copyright © 2021 Chen, Li, Ma, Bo, Soong and Shi.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2021.689791
PMCID: PMC8318040
PMID: 34335165

Conflict of interest statement: FS was employed by company Microsoft Research 
Asia. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as 
a potential conflict of interest.