1. Psychooncology. 2025 Apr;34(4):e70143. doi: 10.1002/pon.70143.

Storytelling Through Music With Parents Whose Children Have Died From Cancer: A 
Randomized Controlled Feasibility Trial.

Phillips CS(1), Morris SE(2), Rodriguez E(3), Woods H(4), Hebdon M(5), Choi 
E(6), Morris J(7), Morgan RB(7), Moorjani D(1), Lutrell J(8), Gruber C(9), 
Schroder A(9), Umberson D(10), Mao JJ(11).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Supportive Oncology, Harvard Medical School, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Educational Psychology, The University of Texas at Austin, 
Austin, Texas, USA.
(4)Community Hospital of the Monterey Peninsula, Ohana Center for Child and 
Adolescent Behavioral Health, Monterey, California, USA.
(5)College of Nursing, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(6)Department of Nursing, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(7)Dell Children's Medical Center, Austin, Texas, USA.
(8)Quality of Life & Palliative Care Division Grief and Bereavement Services, 
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(9)No Academic Affiliation.
(10)Department of Sociology and Population Research Center, The University of 
Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA.
(11)Weill Cornell Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Bereaved parents have significantly higher morbidity and mortality 
than non-bereaved parents. Despite national guidelines recommending bereavement 
care, resources for bereaved parents are scarce. Most intervention studies lack 
empirical evidence of effectiveness or alignment with key theoretical concepts.
AIMS: To evaluate the feasibility of a 6-week intervention with parents of 
children who have died from cancer. Storytelling Through Music (STM) combines 
multiple modalities of expression (storytelling, reflective writing, 
songwriting) and psychoeducation to facilitate loss- and restoration-oriented 
coping by creating a legacy piece (self-written story paired with a song) to 
help bereaved parents adapt to a life-long process of finding meaning after 
loss.
METHODS: Two-group, randomized controlled trial, utilizing multiple methods. 
Participants were randomized to STM or waitlist control. The intervention is 
delivered online and in a group setting. Descriptive statistics were used for 
feasibility data, content analysis to evaluate open-ended acceptability 
questions, and RM ANOVA to evaluate the differences between psychosocial, 
coping, and grief outcomes.
RESULTS: Twenty-three parents were enrolled. Average age was (range: 32-68) and 
the child's average age was 18.9 (range: 1.5-35). This study indicates that the 
online delivery of STM is feasible and acceptable and provides preliminary 
evidence of reducing prolonged grief and loneliness.
CONCLUSIONS: STM is a theoretically driven, innovative approach to addressing 
grief in a high-risk, underserved population. Findings suggest STM can be 
delivered online and is acceptable to participants. Adding music to storytelling 
and reflective writing provides a unique expression and preliminary data 
suggests improvements in psychosocial well-being, coping, and grief intensity.

© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pon.70143
PMID: 40195024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]