1. J Affect Disord. 2025 Jun 1;378:271-280. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2025.03.011. Epub 
2025 Mar 4.

Sharper minds: Feasibility and effectiveness of a mental health promotion 
package for university students targeting multiple health and self-care 
behaviours.

Dingle GA(1), Han R(2), Huang K(3), Alhadad SSJ(4), Beckman E(3), Bentley SV(5), 
Edmed S(6), Gomersall SR(7), Hides L(2), Lorimer N(8), Maccallum F(2), McKimmie 
BM(2), Ng N(3), Rossa K(6), Smith SS(6), Walter ZC(2), Williams E(2), Wright 
ORL(3), Tanksale R(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. 
Electronic address: dingle@psy.uq.edu.au.
(2)School of Psychology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(3)School of Human Movement and Nutrition Sciences, The University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(4)School of Education and Professional Studies, Griffith University, Brisbane, 
Australia.
(5)School of Psychology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia; 
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), Brisbane, 
Australia.
(6)Child Health Research Centre, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Australia; ARC Centre of Excellence for Children and Families over the Life 
Course, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(7)Health and Wellbeing Centre for Research Innovation, School of Human Movement 
and Nutrition Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia; 
School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, Australia.
(8)School of Psychology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia; ARC 
Centre of Excellence for Children and Families over the Life Course, The 
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: This study assessed the feasibility and effectiveness of the Sharper 
Minds package, a mental health intervention designed for university students, 
co-developed with student input. The program included a weekly self-monitoring 
e-tool and/or a short course targeting six self-care areas: physical activity, 
diet, sleep, music to aid study, mood regulation, and social connection.
METHOD: A non-randomised controlled trial involved 433 undergraduate students in 
three conditions: control, one-intervention (either e-tool or course), and 
two-intervention (both e-tool and course). Data were collected at baseline and 
after six weeks. Feasibility was measured by reach, retention, and 
acceptability, while primary outcomes focused on mental health indicators such 
as depression and anxiety, and secondary outcomes were somatic symptoms, 
wellbeing and academic motivation.
RESULTS: Results indicated good retention (72 %) and positive feedback on 
acceptability. Students receiving both interventions (two-intervention 
condition) showed a 17.6 % reduction in the proportion screening positive for 
mental health issues, a change not seen in other conditions. A MANCOVA analysis 
identified a significant interaction between condition and time across combined 
outcomes (depression, anxiety, somatic symptoms, wellbeing, and motivation), 
with a small effect size.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first mental health promotion package for Australian 
university students addressing multiple health and self-care behaviours. 
Findings indicate students found the package components acceptable and 
experienced positive effects on mental health.
ANZ CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: Retrospectively registered 1/09/2023, 
https://www.anzctr.org.au/Trial/Registration/TrialReview.aspx?id=386141&isReview=true.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2025.03.011
PMID: 40049528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
report there are no competing interests to declare.