1. Sci Rep. 2025 Apr 14;15(1):12783. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-97199-6.

The effect of aromatherapy and music therapy on blood pressure and heart rate of 
nursing students before taking the exam.

Borzoo T(1), Tafazoli M(2), Ebrahimzadeh M(1), Kazemi-Arpanahi H(3), Tabahfar 
R(1), Kamyari N(4), Hadideh F(5), Malaekeh SMA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nursing, School of Nursing, Abadan University of Medical 
Sciences, Abadan, Iran.
(2)Department of Nursing, School of Nursing, Abadan University of Medical 
Sciences, Abadan, Iran. Mahsa.tafazoli@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Health Information Technology, Abadan University of Medical 
Sciences, Abadan, Iran.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, School of Health, Research 
Center for Environmental Contaminants (RCEC), Abadan University of Medical 
Sciences, Abadan, Iran.
(5)Department of Psychiatry Counselling, Abadan University of Medical Sciences, 
Abadan, Iran.
(6)Department of Laboratory Sciences, Abadan University of Medical Sciences, 
Abadan, Iran.

Anxiety associated with taking exams jeopardizes students' mental and physical 
health. Complementary alternative methods, such as aromatherapy and music 
therapy, have shown promise in reducing negative emotions among students. 
However, few studies have examined the effects of these interventions. This 
study aimed to investigate the effects of aromatherapy and music therapy on 
nursing students' blood pressure (BP) and heart rate before taking an exam. This 
quasi-experimental, double-blinded study was conducted in 2023 at the Nursing 
College of Abadan University of Medical Sciences in Abadan, Iran. The research 
included a total of 169 nursing students, who were randomly assigned to three 
groups: an aromatherapy group (n = 60), a music therapy group (n = 56), and a 
control group (n = 53). Aromatherapy was administered by inhaling lavender and 
damask rose essences, while music therapy involved listening to Beethoven's 
"Moonlight Sonata." The control group received a placebo intervention consisting 
of cotton soaked in 10 drops of water. Each intervention lasted twenty minutes 
and was conducted in separate rooms before an exam. Students' heart rates and BP 
(both systolic and diastolic) were recorded before and after the intervention. 
The study showed remarkable effects of aromatherapy and music therapy on blood 
pressure and pulse rate. While systolic blood pressure (SBP) was similar in all 
groups at the beginning of the study (p = 0.205), SBP decreased significantly 
after the intervention (p = 0.016), especially in the aromatherapy (p = 0.003) 
and music therapy (p < 0.001) groups. Both interventions also significantly 
reduced diastolic blood pressure and pulse rate (p < 0.001) compared to 
baseline. However, except for SBP (p = 0.021), ANCOVA tests did not reveal 
significant differences between the study groups for diastolic blood pressure 
and pulse rate (p > 0.05). The reduction in students' systolic BP before exams, 
observed with complementary therapies like music therapy and aromatherapy using 
lavender and damask rose extracts, suggests a decrease in stress-related 
physiological responses, However, the specific link to exam-related anxiety 
requires further clarification.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-97199-6
PMCID: PMC11997094
PMID: 40229405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests. Ethics approval and consent to participate: This 
research was conducted in full compliance with the ethical standards of both the 
institutional and national research committees. Ethics approval was obtained 
from the Abadan University of Medical Sciences, prior to the commencement of the 
study (IR.ABADANUMS.REC.1401.162). All methods were performed in accordance with 
the relevant guidelines and regulations by the ethical committee of Abadan 
University of Medical Sciences. All experimental protocols were approved by the 
ethical committee of Abadan University of Medical Sciences. Participation was 
voluntary, written consent was obtained from the subjects. Participants had the 
right to withdraw from the study at any time without prejudice. Clinical trial 
number: not applicable.