1. Front Hum Neurosci. 2022 Jan 17;15:789467. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.789467. 
eCollection 2021.

Rhythm and Music-Based Interventions in Motor Rehabilitation: Current Evidence 
and Future Perspectives.

Braun Janzen T(1), Koshimori Y(2)(3), Richard NM(2)(4), Thaut MH(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Center of Mathematics, Computing and Cognition, Universidade Federal do ABC, 
São Bernardo do Campo, Brazil.
(2)Music and Health Science Research Collaboratory, Faculty of Music, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Brain Health Imaging Centre, CAMH, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Faculty of Music, Belmont University, Nashville, TN, United States.
(5)Rehabilitation Sciences Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.

Research in basic and clinical neuroscience of music conducted over the past 
decades has begun to uncover music's high potential as a tool for 
rehabilitation. Advances in our understanding of how music engages parallel 
brain networks underpinning sensory and motor processes, arousal, reward, and 
affective regulation, have laid a sound neuroscientific foundation for the 
development of theory-driven music interventions that have been systematically 
tested in clinical settings. Of particular significance in the context of motor 
rehabilitation is the notion that musical rhythms can entrain movement patterns 
in patients with movement-related disorders, serving as a continuous time 
reference that can help regulate movement timing and pace. To date, a 
significant number of clinical and experimental studies have tested the 
application of rhythm- and music-based interventions to improve motor functions 
following central nervous injury and/or degeneration. The goal of this review is 
to appraise the current state of knowledge on the effectiveness of music and 
rhythm to modulate movement spatiotemporal patterns and restore motor function. 
By organizing and providing a critical appraisal of a large body of research, we 
hope to provide a revised framework for future research on the effectiveness of 
rhythm- and music-based interventions to restore and (re)train motor function.

Copyright © 2022 Braun Janzen, Koshimori, Richard and Thaut.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.789467
PMCID: PMC8801707
PMID: 35111007

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.