1. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2016;229:314-23.

Interaction Design in the Built Environment: Designing for the 'Universal User'.

Dalton C(1).

Author information:
(1)UCD SMARTlab/Ulster University, Ireland.

Concepts of responsive architecture have to date largely involved response to 
environmental context, in order to mediate ambient environmental factors and 
modify internal conditions for the comfort of users, with energy efficiency and 
sustainability as the main impetus. 'Smart' buildings often address little other 
than technically functional issues, with any ideas of 'design' as a unifying 
factor being disregarded. At the same time, music and performance art have been 
in the vanguard of creating digital interaction that intimately involves the 
user in aesthetic outcomes, in the creation of what Umberto Eco describes as an 
'Open Work'. Environments made responsive through embedment of computational 
technologies can similarly extend usability and user-centred design towards 
universality, through careful consideration of the relationship between person, 
context and activity, and of the continuous and ultimately transactional nature 
of human occupation of built environment. Truly 'smart' environments will learn 
from and through usage, and can be conceived and designed so as to maximise 
environmental 'fit' for a wider variety of users, including people described as 
being 'neurodiverse'. Where user response becomes a significant component in 
managing a smart environment, the transactional relationship between user and 
environment is made explicit, and can ultimately be used to drive interaction 
that favours ease-of-use and personalisation. Inclusion of affective computing 
in human interaction with built environment offers significant potential for 
extending the boundaries of Universal Design to include people with autism, 
people with intellectual disability, and users with acquired cognitive 
impairment, including that arising from dementia. The same users frequently have 
issues with sensory-perceptual sensitivity and processing. The resulting 
mismatch between their individual needs and abilities, and the environments they 
typically occupy, can give rise to states of chronic and acute anxiety. Analysis 
of the characteristics of such users gives rise to various 'personas', whose 
functional and psychosocial needs may be best met by responsive environments 
which take consideration of affective state, that is, of mood and emotion. 
Human-computer interaction which marries responsive architecture and affective 
computing offers a new paradigm for smart environments, which are intrinsically 
user-centred as a consequence. The technical complexity of designing such an 
environment must always be balanced by the absolute necessity of utilising 
Universal Design principles to reduce the underlying technological complexity to 
a usable interface. This paper is a preliminary exploration of the principles 
underlying the design of one such responsive environment: an interactive sensory 
room for children with autism spectrum disorders, (ASDs), which aims to promote 
relaxation and thus reduce anxiety.

PMID: 27534322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]