1. Infancy. 2023 Sep-Oct;28(5):910-929. doi: 10.1111/infa.12556. Epub 2023 Jul
19.

Automated measurement of infant and mother Duchenne facial expressions in the 
Face-to-Face/Still-Face.

Ahn YA(1), Önal Ertuğrul I(2), Chow SM(3), Cohn JF(4), Messinger DS(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Human Development and Family Studies, Pennsylvania State 
University, State College, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA.
(5)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Miami, Coral 
Gables, Florida, USA.
(6)Departments of Pediatrics and Music Engineering, University of Miami, Coral 
Gables, Florida, USA.

Although still-face effects are well-studied, little is known about the degree 
to which the Face-to-Face/Still-Face (FFSF) is associated with the production of 
intense affective displays. Duchenne smiling expresses more intense positive 
affect than non-Duchenne smiling, while Duchenne cry-faces express more intense 
negative affect than non-Duchenne cry-faces. Forty 4-month-old infants and their 
mothers completed the FFSF, and key affect-indexing facial Action Units (AUs) 
were coded by expert Facial Action Coding System coders for the first 30 s of 
each FFSF episode. Computer vision software, automated facial affect recognition 
(AFAR), identified AUs for the entire 2-min episodes. Expert coding and AFAR 
produced similar infant and mother Duchenne and non-Duchenne FFSF effects, 
highlighting the convergent validity of automated measurement. Substantive AFAR 
analyses indicated that both infant Duchenne and non-Duchenne smiling declined 
from the FF to the SF, but only Duchenne smiling increased from the SF to the 
RE. In similar fashion, the magnitude of mother Duchenne smiling changes over 
the FFSF were 2-4 times greater than non-Duchenne smiling changes. Duchenne 
expressions appear to be a sensitive index of intense infant and mother 
affective valence that are accessible to automated measurement and may be a 
target for future FFSF research.

© 2023 International Congress of Infant Studies.

DOI: 10.1111/infa.12556
PMCID: PMC10426229
PMID: 37466002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]