1. Heliyon. 2023 Dec 11;10(1):e23611. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e23611. 
eCollection 2024 Jan 15.

Investigation of different ML approaches in classification of emotions induced 
by acute stress.

Sourkatti H(1), Pettersson K(1), van der Sanden B(2), Lindholm M(1), Plomp J(1), 
Määttänen I(3), Henttonen P(3), Närväinen J(1).

Author information:
(1)VTT Technical Research Center of Finland, Tekniikantie 1, 02150 Espoo, 
Finland.
(2)Eindhoven University of Technology, Electrical Engineering, Netherlands.
(3)University of Helsinki, Department of Psychology and Logopedics, Faculty of 
Medicine, P.O. Box 63, 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Machine learning is becoming a common tool in monitoring emotion. 
However, methodological studies of the processing pipeline are scarce, 
especially ones using subjective appraisals as ground truth.
NEW METHOD: A novel protocol was used to induce cognitive load and physical 
discomfort, and emotional dimensions (arousal, valence, and dominance) were 
reported after each task. The performance of five common ML models with a 
versatile set of features (physiological features, task performance data, and 
personality trait) was compared in binary classification of subjectively 
assessed emotions.
RESULTS: The psychophysiological responses proved the protocol was successful in 
changing the mental state from baseline, also the cognitive and physical tasks 
were different. The optimization and performance of ML models used for emotion 
detection were evaluated. Additionally, methods to account for imbalanced 
classes were applied and shown to improve the classification performance.
COMPARISON WITH EXISTING METHODS: Classification of human emotional states often 
assumes the states are determined by the stimuli. However, individual appraisals 
vary. None of the past studies have classified subjective emotional dimensions 
with a set of features including biosignals, personality and behavior.
CONCLUSION: Our data represent a typical setup in affective computing utilizing 
psychophysiological monitoring: N is low compared to number of features, 
inter-individual variability is high, and class imbalance cannot be avoided. Our 
observations are a) if possible, include features representing physiology, 
behavior and personality, b) use simple models and limited number of features to 
improve interpretability, c) address the possible imbalance, d) if the data size 
allows, use nested cross-validation.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e23611
PMCID: PMC10761802
PMID: 38173518

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.