1. Behav Sci (Basel). 2024 Dec 13;14(12):1195. doi: 10.3390/bs14121195.

Does Trauma Change the Way Individuals with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 
(PTSD) Deal with Positive Stimuli?

Pino O(1), Rossi M(1), Malvezzi MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Via Volturno, 39, 
43125 Parma, PR, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is a highly prevalent 
disorder and a highly debilitating condition. Although current theories focused 
on depressed mood and intrusion as critical dimensions, the mechanism through 
which depression increases the risk of PTSD remains unclear. Research usually 
concentrates on the hyperactive negative valence system (NVS) (e.g., increased 
fear and threat responses), but some evidence suggests a significant role for 
the hypoactive positive valence system (PVS) (e.g., less neural activation 
towards rewards).
METHOD: The main aim of the present research was to investigate whether probable 
PTSD leads to a different evaluation of the implicit processing in a refugee's 
sample. Ratings of arousal, dominance, and valence from 60 International 
Affective Picture System (IAPS) pictures (positive, neutral, and negative) were 
collected from 42 individuals with probable PTSD, and a group of 26 
trauma-exposed individuals (Mage = 28.49 years, SD = ±7.78).
RESULTS: ANOVA results revealed a main group effect (η2p = 0.379) on arousal, 
dominance, valence dimensions, and pictures' categories (η2p = 0.620), 
confirming evidence according to which PTSD origins a state of maladaptive 
hyperarousal and troubles the regulation of emotions, and not supporting the 
view that such difficulties arise only with negative stimuli. Participants with 
probable PTSD deemed negative stimuli as more threatening than they really are, 
reacting to unpleasant images with greater negative emotionality (i.e., enhanced 
arousal and lower valence ratings) compared with individuals without PTSD. 
Moreover, they rated positive stimuli as less pleasant. Furthermore, arousal 
ratings were negatively correlated with valence (r = -0.709, p < 0.01) 
indicating that pictures with high arousal (negative) were associated with lower 
valence.
DISCUSSION: Our findings supported evidence according to which PTSD caused a 
constant state of hyperarousal and difficulties in regulating emotions facing 
environmental stimuli. Positive stimuli are considered less pleasant, and this 
inhibits from completely benefiting from them.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides evidence for a differential and potentially 
complementary involvement of NVS and PVS in PTSD development. Intervention for 
PTSD may, thus, target both negative and positive valence processing.

DOI: 10.3390/bs14121195
PMCID: PMC11673864
PMID: 39767336

Conflict of interest statement: The author has no conflicts of interest that are 
directly or indirectly related to the work submitted for publication to report.