1. Comput Biol Med. 2024 May;173:108329. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2024.108329. 
Epub 2024 Mar 19.

An enhanced Coati Optimization Algorithm for global optimization and feature 
selection in EEG emotion recognition.

Houssein EH(1), Hammad A(2), Emam MM(3), Ali AA(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Computers and Information, Minia University, Minia, Egypt. 
Electronic address: essam.halim@mu.edu.eg.
(2)Faculty of Computers and Information, Minia University, Minia, Egypt. 
Electronic address: asmaa.hammad@mu.edu.eg.
(3)Faculty of Computers and Information, Minia University, Minia, Egypt. 
Electronic address: marwa.khalef@mu.edu.eg.
(4)Faculty of Computers and Information, Minia University, Minia, Egypt. 
Electronic address: a.ali@mu.edu.eg.

Emotion recognition based on Electroencephalography (EEG) signals has garnered 
significant attention across diverse domains including healthcare, education, 
information sharing, and gaming, among others. Despite its potential, the 
absence of a standardized feature set poses a challenge in efficiently 
classifying various emotions. Addressing the issue of high dimensionality, this 
paper introduces an advanced variant of the Coati Optimization Algorithm (COA), 
called eCOA for global optimization and selecting the best subset of EEG 
features for emotion recognition. Specifically, COA suffers from local optima 
and imbalanced exploitation abilities as other metaheuristic methods. The 
proposed eCOA incorporates the COA and RUNge Kutta Optimizer (RUN) algorithms. 
The Scale Factor (SF) and Enhanced Solution Quality (ESQ) mechanism from RUN are 
applied to resolve the raised shortcomings of COA. The proposed eCOA algorithm 
has been extensively evaluated using the CEC'22 test suite and two EEG emotion 
recognition datasets, DEAP and DREAMER. Furthermore, the eCOA is applied for 
binary and multi-class classification of emotions in the dimensions of valence, 
arousal, and dominance using a multi-layer perceptron neural network (MLPNN). 
The experimental results revealed that the eCOA algorithm has more powerful 
search capabilities than the original COA and seven well-known counterpart 
methods related to statistical, convergence, and diversity measures. 
Furthermore, eCOA can efficiently support feature selection to find the best EEG 
features to maximize performance on four quadratic emotion classification 
problems compared to the methods of its counterparts. The suggested method 
obtains a classification accuracy of 85.17% and 95.21% in the binary 
classification of low and high arousal emotions in two public datasets: DEAP and 
DREAMER, respectively, which are 5.58% and 8.98% superior to existing approaches 
working on the same datasets for different subjects, respectively.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2024.108329
PMID: 38513391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest No conflict of 
interest exists.