1. Emotion. 2025 Feb;25(1):57-69. doi: 10.1037/emo0001358. Epub 2024 Aug 29.

Judging emotion in natural images of crowds.

Hao S(1), Whitney D(1), Bishop SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley.

It has been suggested that humans use summary statistics such as the average of 
the emotion of individual faces when they rapidly judge group emotion. Previous 
studies have mainly used faces of actors posing basic emotions, and morphed 
versions of these faces, against a plain background. In the present study, 
photographs taken in real-world settings were used to investigate the influence 
of mean facial emotion, maximal facial emotion, and background context on 
judgments of group emotion, assessed using dimensional ratings of valence, 
arousal, and dominance. Background context explained a significant amount of 
unique variance in group ratings for each dimension. Mean emotion explained 
additional unique variance for valence ratings, whereas maximal emotion 
explained additional unique variance for arousal, with dominance showing more 
mixed results. Removing background context and disrupting the contextual and 
spatial relationship between faces by randomly replacing faces with ones from 
other images within the stimulus set increased reliance on mean emotion. 
However, under all conditions, the maximally arousing face continued to exert an 
influence on ratings of group arousal, in line with theoretical accounts arguing 
for a unique bottom-up effect of emotional arousal on attentional competition 
and postattentive perceptual processing. Together these findings suggest that 
individuals' reliance on average emotion when judging crowd scenes differs as a 
function of the dimension of affect. In addition, the presence of background 
context both directly impacts judgments of crowd emotion and modulates the 
relative influence of maximal versus mean emotion on these judgments. (PsycInfo 
Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/emo0001358
PMID: 39207394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]