1. Sci Rep. 2025 Mar 20;15(1):9643. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-94051-9.

Multidisciplinary characterization of embarrassment through behavioral and 
acoustic modeling.

Šipka D(1)(2), Vlasenko B(3), Stein M(4)(5), Dierks T(5), Magimai-Doss M(3), 
Morishima Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, University of Bern, 
Bern, Switzerland. dajana.sipka@unibe.ch.
(2)Institute for Psychology Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy Department, 
University of Bern, Fabrikstrasse 8, Bern, 3012, Switzerland. 
dajana.sipka@unibe.ch.
(3)Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, University of Bern, 
Bern, Switzerland.
(5)University Hospital of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Bern, 
Bern, Switzerland.

Embarrassment is a social emotion that shares many characteristics with social 
anxiety (SA). Most people experience embarrassment in their daily lives, but it 
is quite overlooked in research. We characterized embarrassment through an 
interdisciplinary approach, introducing a behavioral paradigm and applying 
machine learning approaches, including acoustic analyses. 33 participants wrote 
about an embarrassing experience and then, without knowing it prior, had to read 
it out loud to the conductor. Embarrassment was then examined using two 
different approaches: Firstly, from a subjective view, with self-report measures 
from the participants. Secondly, from an objective, machine-learning approach, 
in which trained models tested the robustness of our embarrassment data set 
(i.e., prediction accuracy), and then described embarrassment in a dimensional 
(i.e., dimension: valence, arousal, dominance; VAD) and categorical (i.e., 
comparing embarrassment to other emotional states) way. The subjective rating of 
embarrassment was increased after participants read their stories out loud, and 
participants with higher SA scores experienced higher embarrassment than 
participants with lower SA scores. The state of embarrassment was predicted with 
86.4% as the best of the unweighted average recall rates. While the simple VAD 
dimensional analyses did not differentiate between the state of embarrassment 
and the references, the complex emotional category analyses characterized 
embarrassment as closer to boredom, a neutral state, and less of sadness. 
Combining an effective behavioral paradigm and advanced acoustic modeling, we 
characterized the emotional state of embarrassment, and the identified 
characteristics could be used as a biomarker to assess SA.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-94051-9
PMCID: PMC11926074
PMID: 40113853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests. Ethics declarations: The ethics committee of the 
faculty of human sciences at the University of Bern approved the study protocol 
(2020-06-00004). All participants gave written informed consent to participate 
in the study. We hereby confirm that the experiment was performed in accordance 
with the relevant guidelines and regulations according to the Declaration of 
Helsinki.