1. Sci Data. 2023 Dec 7;10(1):878. doi: 10.1038/s41597-023-02701-2.

A Chinese Face Dataset with Dynamic Expressions and Diverse Ages Synthesized by 
Deep Learning.

Han S(#)(1)(2), Guo Y(#)(1), Zhou X(#)(3), Huang J(4), Shen L(5), Luo 
Y(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)School of psychology, Magnetic Resonance Imaging Center, China-UK Visual 
Information Processing Laboratory, Institute of Computer Vision, College of 
Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Department of Psychology and Center for Brain and Cognitive Sciences, School 
of Education, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal 
University, Beijing, China.
(4)School of Psychology, Sichuan Center of Applied Psychology, Chengdu Medical 
College, Chengdu, China.
(5)School of psychology, Magnetic Resonance Imaging Center, China-UK Visual 
Information Processing Laboratory, Institute of Computer Vision, College of 
Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China. 
llshen@szu.edu.cn.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal 
University, Beijing, China. luoyj@bnu.edu.cn.
(7)School of Psychology, Sichuan Center of Applied Psychology, Chengdu Medical 
College, Chengdu, China. luoyj@bnu.edu.cn.
(8)Institute for Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, University of Health and 
Rehabilitation Sciences, Qingdao, China. luoyj@bnu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Facial stimuli have gained increasing popularity in research. However, the 
existing Chinese facial datasets primarily consist of static facial expressions 
and lack variations in terms of facial aging. Additionally, these datasets are 
limited to stimuli from a small number of individuals, in that it is difficult 
and time-consuming to recruit a diverse range of volunteers across different age 
groups to capture their facial expressions. In this paper, a deep-learning based 
face editing approach, StyleGAN, is used to synthesize a Chinese face dataset, 
namely SZU-EmoDage, where faces with different expressions and ages are 
synthesized. Leverage on the interpolations of latent vectors, continuously 
dynamic expressions with different intensities, are also available. Participants 
assessed emotional categories and dimensions (valence, arousal and dominance) of 
the synthesized faces. The results show that the face database has good 
reliability and validity, and can be used in relevant psychological experiments. 
The availability of SZU-EmoDage opens up avenues for further research in 
psychology and related fields, allowing for a deeper understanding of facial 
perception.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41597-023-02701-2
PMCID: PMC10703811
PMID: 38062057

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.