1. Crim Behav Ment Health. 2024 Oct;34(5):446-461. doi: 10.1002/cbm.2351. Epub
2024  Sep 4.

Psychopathy, criminogenic cognitions and emotional responses to affective 
stimuli among male adult offenders.

Manole S(1), Enea V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Alexandru Ioan Cuza University, Iasi, Romania.

BACKGROUND: Previous research has consistently shown value in studying emotion 
processing with psychopathy, but the relative effect of aural and visual 
stimulation has hardly been considered.
AIMS: Our aims were to (1) compare reaction time and self-rated valence 
((un)pleasantness), arousal and sense of being dominated by affective sounds or 
visual images among offenders with and without psychopathy (=/>26) on the 
psychopathy check-list revised; (2) investigate any associations, controlling 
for social desirability and depression; (3) explore the possible mediating 
effect of criminogenic cognitions on any relationships between psychopathy and 
emotional responses to affective stimuli.
METHODS: Professional educators invited all male offenders serving semi-open 
custody sentences in one prison to participate. After a semi structured 
interview to assess psychopathy, they self-reported on criminogenic cognition, 
depression and social desirability scales, before a computer task using 
standardised human and animal sounds and images. Using the self-assessment 
manikin, participants rated the emotional valence, arousal and dominance levels 
when pleasant, unpleasant and neutral sounds or images were presented.
RESULTS: About one in three prisoners completed all the ratings-120 men, of mean 
age 38.8 years (SD = 11.06). All had shorter reaction times to sounds than 
images. Offenders with high affective-interpersonal factor scores rated all 
types of sounds as less pleasant. Men with high psychopathy scores took longer 
to respond to unpleasant images than those with lower scores. There was a 
positive relationship between psychopathy factors and criminogenic cognitions 
and the external locus of criminogenic cognitions mediated the relationship 
between psychopathy facets and emotional responses of valence to pleasant 
sounds.
CONCLUSION: Our findings confirm the potential importance of emotional reactions 
to sounds as well as images among men with psychopathy. Given the shorter 
reaction times to sounds, in real life sounds could prove more provocative than 
images. While only small differences emerged between men above and below the 
PCL-R threshold, indications from facet analyses suggest that further study of 
sound stimuli could enhance the understanding of emotional response differences 
to inform interventions. Future research in this area should focus on 
human-related stimuli and add alexithymia measures.

© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cbm.2351
PMID: 39233382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]