1. Behav Res Methods. 2024 Oct;56(7):7427-7439. doi: 10.3758/s13428-024-02428-x. 
Epub 2024 Apr 29.

TACO: A Turkish database for abstract concepts.

Conca F(1), Gibbons DM(1), Bayram B(2), Incesoy EI(3)(4)(5), Tacchini M(6)(7), 
Düzel E(3)(4), Cappa SF(8)(9), Catricalà E(1).

Author information:
(1)ICoN Cognitive Neuroscience Center, Institute for Advanced Studies, IUSS, 
Pavia, Italy.
(2)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy.
(3)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Magdeburg, Germany.
(4)Institute for Cognitive Neurology and Dementia Research, Magdeburg, Germany.
(5)Department for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Clinic Magdeburg, 
Magdeburg, Germany.
(6)Experimental Neurophysiology Unit, Institute of Experimental Neurology-INSPE, 
Milan, Italy.
(7)San Raffaele Vita-Salute University, Milan, Italy.
(8)ICoN Cognitive Neuroscience Center, Institute for Advanced Studies, IUSS, 
Pavia, Italy. stefano.cappa@iusspavia.it.
(9)IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy. stefano.cappa@iusspavia.it.

The organization of abstract concepts reflects different dimensions, grounded in 
the brain regions coding for the corresponding experience. Normative measures of 
linguistic stimuli offer noteworthy insights into the organization of conceptual 
knowledge, but studies differ in the dimensions and classes of concepts 
considered. Additionally, most of the available information has been collected 
in English, without considering possible linguistic and cultural differences. 
Here, we aimed to create a comprehensive Turkish database for abstract concepts 
(TACO), including rarely investigated classes such as political concepts. We 
included 503 words-78 concrete (fruits, animals, tools) and 425 abstract 
(emotions, social, mental states, theoretical, quantity, space, political)-rated 
by 134 Turkish speakers for familiarity, imageability, age of acquisition, 
valence, arousal, quantity, space, theoretical, social, mental state, and 
political dimensions. We calculated dominance and exclusivity, indicating the 
dimension receiving the highest mean score for each word, and the position of 
the word along the unidimensional-multidimensional continuum, respectively. A 
principal component analysis (PCA) was conducted on the semantic dimensions. The 
results showed that mental state was the dominant dimension for most concepts. 
Moderate to low levels of exclusivity indicated that the concepts were 
multidimensional. PCA revealed three components: Component 1 captured the 
juxtaposition between social/mental state and magnitude polarities, Component 2 
highlighted affective components, and Component 3 grouped together political and 
theoretical dimensions. The introduction of political concepts provided insights 
into the multidimensional nature of this unexplored class, closely intertwined 
with the theoretical dimension. TACO constitutes the first comprehensive Turkish 
database covering several abstract dimensions, paving the way for 
cross-linguistic and cross-cultural studies of semantic representations.

© 2024. The Psychonomic Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.3758/s13428-024-02428-x
PMID: 38684624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]