1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2023 Jul 7;17:1141607. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2023.1141607. 
eCollection 2023.

Emotion regulation strategies and the two-dimensional model of adult attachment: 
a pilot study.

Domic-Siede M(1), Guzmán-González M(1), Burgos J(2), Carvallo C(2), 
Flores-Guerra C(2), Fredes-Valenzuela C(2), Suazo J(2), Véliz-García O(1), 
Calderón C(1), Sánchez-Corzo A(3), Perrone-Bertolotti M(4)(5), Marín-Medina 
J(6).

Author information:
(1)Núcleo de Investigación en Neurociencia Cognitiva y Afectiva, Laboratorio de 
Neurociencia Cognitiva, Escuela de Psicología, Universidad Católica del Norte, 
Antofagasta, Chile.
(2)Laboratorio de Neurociencia Cognitiva, Escuela de Psicología, Universidad 
Católica del Norte, Antofagasta, Chile.
(3)Multimodal Functional Brain Imaging and Neurorehabilitation Hub, Department 
of Diagnostic Imaging, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
United States.
(4)Université Grenoble Alpes, Université Savoie Mont Blanc, CNRS, LPNC, 
Grenoble, France.
(5)Institut Universitaire de France, Paris, France.
(6)Unidad de Terapia Familiar, Centro de Intervención y Asesoría Psicosocial 
CIAP, Escuela de Psicología, Universidad Católica del Norte, Antofagasta, Chile.

INTRODUCTION: Emotion Regulation plays a crucial role in human's daily lives. 
Extensive research has shown that people with different attachment orientations 
exhibit divergencies in how they perform emotion regulation strategies.
METHODS: 44 adults performed an experimental emotion regulation task in which 
they were instructed to attend, reappraise, or suppress their emotions while 
viewing negative and neutral images taken from the International Affective 
Picture System (IAPS). Afterward, participants rated valence, arousal, and 
emotional dominance elicited by the images. Additionally, attachment 
orientations were measured using the ECR-12 questionnaire.
RESULTS: Results showed a relationship between attachment avoidance and the 
level of arousal during the reappraisal condition; specifically, the higher 
attachment avoidance levels, the greater the emotional intensity during the 
implementation of cognitive reappraisal strategy. Such results suggest an 
association between failing in downregulate intense emotions using cognitive 
reappraisal when there are higher levels of attachment avoidance. Consistently, 
we also found that lower dominance during reappraisal was associated with more 
levels of avoidance.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that people with higher levels of attachment 
avoidance experience difficulties when using the cognitive reappraisal strategy 
to reduce the emotional impact produced by negative emotional stimuli. Our 
findings reinforce the idea that avoidant people experience high physiological 
activation when experience emotions.

Copyright © 2023 Domic-Siede, Guzmán-González, Burgos, Carvallo, Flores-Guerra, 
Fredes-Valenzuela, Suazo, Véliz-García, Calderón, Sánchez-Corzo, 
Perrone-Bertolotti and Marín-Medina.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2023.1141607
PMCID: PMC10359990
PMID: 37484522

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.