1. Mem Cognit. 2025 Jan 24. doi: 10.3758/s13421-024-01678-6. Online ahead of
print.

Semantic similarity is not emotional: No effect of similarity defined by 
valence, arousal, and dominance on short-term ordered recall.

Sonier RP(1), Guitard D(2), Melanson E(1), Jamieson RK(3), Saint-Aubin J(4).

Author information:
(1)École de Psychologie, Université de Moncton, Moncton, NB, E1A 3E9, Canada.
(2)School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.
(4)École de Psychologie, Université de Moncton, Moncton, NB, E1A 3E9, Canada. 
jean.saint-aubin@umoncton.ca.

In short-term ordered recall tasks, phonological similarity impedes item and 
order recall, while semantic similarity benefits item recall with a weak or null 
effect on order recall. Ishiguro and Saito recently suggested that these 
contradictory findings were due to an inadequate assessment of semantic 
similarity. They proposed a novel measure of semantic similarity based on the 
distance between items in a three-dimensional space composed of the semantic 
dimensions of valence, arousal, and dominance. We conducted an experimental 
examination of their proposal. In four experiments, participants performed an 
immediate serial recall or an immediate order reconstruction task. Performance 
of dissimilar lists was contrasted with performance for semantically similar 
lists defined by valence, arousal, and dominance or by the typical latent 
semantic analysis. Two sets of words were used to assess the reproducibility of 
the findings and similar results were observed with both sets. As expected, when 
similarity was defined with latent semantic analysis, items were better recalled 
without noticeable impact on their order. However, contrary to Ishiguro and 
Saito's predictions, when similarity was defined with valence, arousal and 
dominance, no effect emerged.

© 2025. The Psychonomic Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.3758/s13421-024-01678-6
PMID: 39853515

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval: All Experiments 
were approved by the research ethics committee of the Université de Moncton 
(2223–007). Consent to participate: Informed consent was obtained from all 
participants included in the study. Consent for publication: Consent for 
publication was obtained from all participants included in the study. Author 
notes: This research was supported by Discovery grants from the Natural Sciences 
and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) to J.S.A. and to R.K.J. While 
working on this article, R.P.S. was supported by a graduate scholarship from the 
New Brunswick Innovation Foundation. Conflicts of interest/Competing interests: 
The authors have no competing interests to report that are relevant to the 
contents of this article.