1. Front Hum Neurosci. 2024 Mar 13;18:1319574. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2024.1319574. 
eCollection 2024.

Real-time EEG-based emotion recognition for neurohumanities: perspectives from 
principal component analysis and tree-based algorithms.

Blanco-Ríos MA(#)(1), Candela-Leal MO(#)(1)(2), Orozco-Romo C(1), Remis-Serna 
P(1), Vélez-Saboyá CS(3), Lozoya-Santos JJ(1), Cebral-Loureda M(3), 
Ramírez-Moreno MA(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Engineering and Sciences, Mechatronics Department, Tecnológico de 
Monterrey, Monterrey, Mexico.
(2)Fetal-Neonatal Neuroimaging and Developmental Science Center, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(3)School of Humanities and Education, Department of Humanistic Studies, 
Tecnólogico de Monterrey, Monterrey, Mexico.
(#)Contributed equally

Within the field of Humanities, there is a recognized need for educational 
innovation, as there are currently no reported tools available that enable 
individuals to interact with their environment to create an enhanced learning 
experience in the humanities (e.g., immersive spaces). This project proposes a 
solution to address this gap by integrating technology and promoting the 
development of teaching methodologies in the humanities, specifically by 
incorporating emotional monitoring during the learning process of humanistic 
context inside an immersive space. In order to achieve this goal, a real-time 
emotion recognition EEG-based system was developed to interpret and classify 
specific emotions. These emotions aligned with the early proposal by Descartes 
(Passions), including admiration, love, hate, desire, joy, and sadness. This 
system aims to integrate emotional data into the Neurohumanities Lab interactive 
platform, creating a comprehensive and immersive learning environment. This work 
developed a ML, real-time emotion recognition model that provided Valence, 
Arousal, and Dominance (VAD) estimations every 5 seconds. Using PCA, PSD, RF, 
and Extra-Trees, the best 8 channels and their respective best band powers were 
extracted; furthermore, multiple models were evaluated using shift-based data 
division and cross-validations. After assessing their performance, Extra-Trees 
achieved a general accuracy of 94%, higher than the reported in the literature 
(88% accuracy). The proposed model provided real-time predictions of VAD 
variables and was adapted to classify Descartes' six main passions. However, 
with the VAD values obtained, more than 15 emotions can be classified (reported 
in the VAD emotion mapping) and extend the range of this application.

Copyright © 2024 Blanco-Ríos, Candela-Leal, Orozco-Romo, Remis-Serna, 
Vélez-Saboyá, Lozoya-Santos, Cebral-Loureda and Ramírez-Moreno.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2024.1319574
PMCID: PMC10965560
PMID: 38545515

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.