1. Br J Health Psychol. 2024 Sep;29(3):533-550. doi: 10.1111/bjhp.12712. Epub
2023  Dec 11.

Attentional bias in psoriasis: The role of processing time and emotional 
valence.

Etty S(1), George DN(1), van Laarhoven AIM(2)(3), Kleyn CE(4), Walton S(5), 
Holle H(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology and Social Work, University of Hull, Hull, UK.
(2)Health, Medical and Neuropsychology Unit, Faculty of Social and Behavioural 
Sciences, Institute of Psychology, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Dermatology Centre, Salford Royal Hospital, Manchester NIHR Biomedical 
Research Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(5)Hull University Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Hull, UK.

PURPOSE: The present study explored whether people with psoriasis display an 
attentional bias towards disease-related threat words and whether this bias 
occurs relatively early during the phase of stimulus disengagement, or during a 
later maintained attention phase dominated by controlled strategic processes. We 
also explored the degree to which attentional bias is dependent on the emotional 
valence of control words.
METHODS: Individuals with psoriasis and matched controls took part in 4 online 
experiments. Participants completed a spatial cueing paradigm using 
disease-related threat words and control words as cues, in order to obtain 
reaction time estimates of attentional bias.
RESULTS: We did not observe evidence for attentional bias when control words 
were matched with threat words for emotional valence, regardless of whether 
processing time for the cues was limited (Experiment 1: SOA = 250 ms) or 
extended (Experiment 2: SOA = 1050 ms). We also did not observe evidence for 
attentional bias when control words of positive valence were used, but 
processing time was limited (Experiment 3). An attentional bias was only 
observed (p = .012, Cohen's d = .37) when sufficient processing time was 
available and positively-valanced control words were used (Experiment 4).
CONCLUSION: Rather than showing large and generalized AB effects as predicted by 
previous accounts, our results tentatively suggest that AB in psoriasis is 
restricted to situations where participants have ample processing time and 
threat words are easily distinguishable from control words on the basis of 
emotional valence. The pattern of results suggests that attentional bias in 
psoriasis is best characterized as a relatively slow strategic process.

© 2023 British Psychological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bjhp.12712
PMID: 38082501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]